Bilag 1 Bestemmelser om indførelse af JAR-FCL (pilotcertifikater, flyvemaskine og helikopter) samt af SFAR-73 I medfør af § 32, stk. 2, § 34, § 60 og § 149, stk. 10, i lov om luftfart, jf. lovbekendtgørelse nr. 731 af 21. juni 2007, fastsætter Statens Luftfartsvæsen herved efter bemyndigelse fra Transportministeriet, jf. bekendtgørelse nr. 110 af 3. februar 2009 om Statens Luftfartsvæsens opgaver og beføjelser, om kundgørelse af de af luftfartsvæsenet fastsatte forskrifter og om klageadgang, følgende:
1. Referencedokumenter 1.1 Forordning (EF) nr. 785 af 21. april 2004 om forsikringskrav til luftfartsselskaber og luftfartøjsoperatører.
2. Definitioner 2.1 Når der i JAR-FCL nævnes “the Authority”, betyder dette Statens Luftfartsvæsen.
3. Anvendelsesområde Denne BL fastsætter bestemmelser, der gennemfører JAR-FCL 1, JAR-FCL 2 og SFAR-73, samt bestemmelser om a) udstedelseskrav, rettigheder og betingelser for udøvelse af rettigheder for danske certifikater udstedt i henhold til JAR-FCL, b) betingelser for udøvelse af rettigheder for danske certifikater udstedt i henhold til de bestemmelser, der var gældende indtil ikrafttrædelsen af denne BL, og c) betingelser for godkendelse og drift af uddannelsesvirksomheder, hvis hovedforretningssted er beliggende inden for dansk område.
4. Generelt 4.1 Udstedelse og udvidelse af certifikat som luftfartøjsfører på flyvemaskine og helikopter kan kun ske i henhold til bestemmelserne i JAR-FCL.
5. Luftfartøjer Ud over de krav, der fremgår af JAR-FCL, skal flyvemaskiner og helikoptere, der anvendes til skoleflyvning være udstyret som følger:
a) flyvehåndbog (AFM eller owners manual) med de checklister, der er angivet i denne, b) manøvreorganer, inklusive bremser for såvel instruktør som elev, c) dobbelt instrumentering, hvis instruktør og elev ikke kan anvende samme instrument, d) interkommunikationsanlæg, e) kunstig horisont, f) kursgyro og g) drejnings- og krængningsviser eller drejningskoordinator.
6. Skoleflyvning Ud over de krav, der fremgår af JAR-FCL, gælder følgende:
a) har gennemgået en praktisk og teoretisk uddannelse, der er tilstrækkelig til, at vedkommende på sikkerhedsmæssig forsvarlig måde kan foretage den pågældende eneflyvning, b) har modtaget en grundig briefing om den pågældende lektion, og c) har fået udstedt certifikat som luftfartsradiotelefonist.
7. Teoretiske prøver til privatflyvercertifikat (PPL) 7.1 Indstilling af en elev til aflæggelse af prøve over for Statens Luftfartsvæsen skal foretages af en flyveskole (FTO), der er godkendt af Statens Luftfartsvæsen, eller en Registered Facility på en formular, der er autoriseret hertil af Statens Luftfartsvæsen.
 – Love og bestemmelser.
 – Luftfartøjskendskab og flyvelære.
 – Flyvningens planlægning og udførelse.
 – Menneskelig ydeevne og begrænsning.
8. Dispensation Statens Luftfartsvæsen kan i særlige tilfælde dispensere fra bestemmelserne i denne BL, når det skønnes foreneligt med de hensyn, der ligger til grund for de pågældende bestemmelser, og fra bestemmelserne i JAR-FCL i overensstemmelse med reglerne i JAR-FCL.
9. Straf 9.1 Overtrædelse af bestemmelserne i afsnit 5 og 6, JAR-FCL samt SFAR-73, jf. bilag 1 til denne BL, straffes med bøde.
10. Ikrafttræden 10.1 Denne BL træder i kraft den 1. februar 2010.
Statens Luftfartsvæsen, den 16. december 2009 Kurt Lykstoft Larsen / Per Veingberg Bilag 1 Dette bilag indeholder en kopi af bestemmelserne i SFAR 73 (eksklusive bestemmelserne om ikrafttræden og gyldighedsperiode) SFAR No. 73--Robinson R-22/R-44 Special Training and Experience Requirements 1. Applicability.
Under the procedures prescribed herein, this SFAR applies to all persons who seek to manipulate the controls or act as pilot in command of a Robinson model R-22 or R-44 helicopter.
The requirements stated in this SFAR are in addition to the current requirements of part 61.
 2. Required training, aeronautical experience, endorsements, and flight review.
 (a) Awareness Training:
 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, no person may manipulate the controls of a Robinson model R-22 or R-44 helicopter after March 27, 1995 for the purpose of flight unless the awareness training specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section is completed and the person's logbook has been endorsed by a certified flight instructor authorized under paragraph (b)(5) of this section.
 (2) A person who holds a rotorcraft category and helicopter class rating on their pilot certificate and meets the experience requirements of paragraph (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section may not manipulate the controls of a Robinson model R-22 or R-44 helicopter for the purpose of flight after April 26, 1995 unless the awareness training specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section is completed and the person's logbook has been endorsed by a certified flight instructor authorized under paragraph (b)(5) of this section.
 (3) Awareness training must be conducted by a certified flight instructor who has been endorsed under paragraph (b)(5) of this section and consists of instruction in the following general subject areas:
(i) energy management; (ii) mast bumping; (iii) low rotor RPM (blade stall); (iv) low G hazards; and (v) rotor RPM decay.
 (4) A person who can show satisfactory completion of the manufacturer's safety course after January 1, 1994, may obtain an endorsement from an FAA aviation safety inspector in lieu of completing the awareness training required in paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section.
 (b) Aeronautical Experience:
 (1) No person may act as pilot in command of a Robinson model R-22 unless that person:
(i) has had at least 200 flight hours in helicopters, at least 50 flight hours of which were in the Robinson R-22; or (ii) has had at least 10 hours dual instruction in the Robinson R-22 and has received an endorsement from a certified flight instructor authorized under paragraph (b)(5) of this section that the individual has been given the training required by this paragraph and if proficient to act as pilot in command of an R-22. Beginning 12 calendar months after the date of the endorsement, the individual may not act as pilot in command unless the individual has completed a flight review in an R-22 within the preceding 12 calendar months and obtained an endorsement for that flight review.
The dual instruction must include at least the following abnormal and emergency procedures flight training:
(A) enhanced training in autorotation procedures, (B) engine rotor RPM control without the use of the governor, (C) low rotor RPM recognition and recovery, and (D) effects of low G maneuvers and proper recovery procedures.
 (2) No person may act as pilot in command of a Robinson model R-44 unless that person:
(i) has had at least 200 flight hours in helicopters, at least 50 flight hours of which were in the Robinson R-44; or (ii) has had at least 10 hours dual instruction in the Robinson R-44 and has received an endorsement from a certified flight instructor authorized under paragraph (b)(5) of this section that the individual has been given the training required by this paragraph and is proficient to act as pilot in command of an R-44. Beginning 12 calendar months after the date of the endorsement, the individual may not act as pilot in command unless the individual has completed a flight review in an R-44 within the preceding 12 calendar months and obtained an endorsement for that flight review.
The dual instruction must include at least the following abnormal and emergency procedures flight training:
(A) enhanced training in autorotation procedures, (B) engine rotor RPM control without the use of the governor, (C) low rotor RPM recognition and recovery, and (D) effects of low G maneuvers and proper recovery procedures.
(3) A person who does not hold a rotorcraft category and helicopter class rating must have had at least 20 hours of dual instruction in a Robinson R-22 helicopter prior to operating it in solo flight.
In addition, the person must obtain an endorsement from a certified flight instructor authorized under paragraph (b)(5) of this section that instruction has been given in those maneuvers and procedures, and the instructor has found the applicant proficient to solo a Robinson R-22. This endorsement is valid for a period of 90 days.
The dual instruction must include at least the following abnormal and emergency procedures flight training:
(i) enhanced training in autorotation procedures, (ii) engine rotor RPM control without the use of the governor, (iii) low rotor RPM recognition and recovery, and (iv) effects of low G maneuvers and proper recovery procedures.
(4) A person who does not hold a rotocraft category and helicopter class rating must have had at least 20 hours of dual instruction in a Robinson R-44 helicopter prior to operating it in solo flight.
In addition, the person must obtain an endorsement from a certified flight instructor authorized under paragraph (b)(5) of this section that instruction has been given in those maneuvers and procedures, and the instructor has found the applicant proficient to solo a Robinson R-44. This endorsement is valid for a period of 90 days.
The dual instruction must include at least the following abnormal and emergency procedures flight training:
(i) enhanced training in autorotation procedures, (ii) engine rotor RPM control without the use of the governor, (iii) low rotor RPM recognition and recovery, and (iv) effects of low G maneuvers and proper recovery procedures.
 (5) No certificated flight instructor may provide instruction or conduct a flight review in a Robinson model R-22 or R-44 unless that instructor:
(i) Completes the awareness training in paragraph 2(a) of this SFAR, (ii) Meets the experience requirements of paragraphs 2(b)(1)(i) of this SFAR for the R-22, or 2(b)(2)(i) of this SFAR for the R-44, (iii) Has completed flight training in an R-22, R-44, or both, on the following abnormal and emergency procedures:
(A) enhanced training in autorotation procedures, (B) engine rotor RPM control without the use of the governor, (C) low rotor RPM recognition and recovery, and (D) effects of low G maneuvers and proper recovery procedures.
 (iv) Been authorized by endorsement from an FAA aviation safety inspector or authorized designated examiner that the instructor has completed the appropriate training, meets the experience requirements and has satisfactorily demonstrated an ability to provide instruction on the general subject areas of paragraph 2(a)(3) of this SFAR, and the flight training identified in paragraph 2(b)(5)(iii) of this SFAR.
 (c) Flight Review:
 (1) No flight review completed to satisfy Sec. 61.56 by an individual after becoming eligible to function as pilot in command in a Robinson R-22 helicopter shall be valid for the operation of R-22 helicopter unless that flight review was taken in an R-22.
 (2) No flight review completed to satisfy Sec. 61.56 by individual after becoming eligible to function as pilot in command in a Robinson R-44 helicopter shall be valid for the operation of R-44 helicopter unless that flight review was taken in the R-44.
 (3) The flight review will include a review of the awareness training subject areas of paragraph 2(a)(3) of this SFAR and the flight training identified in paragraph 2(b) of this SFAR.
 (d) Currency Requirements: No person may act as pilot in command of a Robinson model R-22 or R-44 helicopter carrying passengers unless the pilot in command has met the recency of flight experience requirements of Sec. 61.57 in an R-22 or R-44, as appropriate.
