(Til fremstillere og forbrugere af  

 medicinske utensilier.) Medens strålesterilisering af medicinske utensilier i Danmark hidtil har  

 fundet sted på atomenergikommisionens forsøgsanlæg på Risø, er der nu åbnet  

 mulighed for, at dette kan ske andensteds.
Dette forhold giver  

 sundhedsstyrelsen anledning til ved nærværende cirkulære at redegøre for de  

 principper, der fremover bør anvendes ved fastsættelsen af procedure og  

 bestrålingsdoser, og som hidtil er anvendt på Risø på grundlag af et løbende  

 samarbejde mellem Atomenergikommisionen, Statens Seruminstitut og  

 Sundhedsstyrelsen.
Som et resultat af det ovennævnte samarbejde blev det for nogle år siden  

 klart, at fastsættelsen af bestrålingsdosis måtte ske på grundlag af det  

 ubestrålede materiales komtamineringsgrad bestemt ved en mikrobiologisk  

 undersøgelse samt under hensyn til bestrålingsanlæggets mikrobiologiske  

 effekt.
Det er da også på denne basis, den af den internationale  

 atomenergiorganisation udsendte »Code of Practice for Radiation  

 Sterilization of Medical Products« er opbygget.
Heri er det blandt andet  

 fastsat, at bestrålingsdosis skal øges, hvis det gennemsnitlige initiale  

 kimtal under kontrollen af en løbende produktion overstiger en af de  

 relevante sundhedsmyndigheder fastsat grænseværdi, hvis producenten ikke  

 omgående kan finde og fjerne årsagen til den øgede forurening.
 Sundhedsstyrelsen skal ved nærværende cirkulære henlede opmærksomheden på,  

 at men anser det for uforsvarligt at anvende strålesteriliserede medicinske  

 utensilier, medmindre varerne er fremstillet i nøje overensstemmelse med de  

 principper, der er gengivet i den som bilag 1 til nærværende cirkulære  

 optagne rekommandation vedrørende strålesteriliserede medicinske utensilier.
 I den givne anledning henstiller sundhedsstyrelsen derfor til alle brugere  

 af strålesteriliserede medicinske utensilier, at de ved ethvert indkøb af  

 disse varer på passende måde sikrer sig fabrikantens skriftlige garanti for,  

 at fremstillingen af varerne er sket i nøje overensstemmelse med de i  

 rekommandationen anførte bestemmelser.
 Den af den internationale atomenergiorganisation udsendte »Code of  

 Practice for Radiation Sterilization of Medical Products« er ligeledes  

 vedføjet som bilag til nærværende cirkulære.
 SUNDHEDSSTYRELSEN, DEN 19. AUGUST 1968.
Esther Ammundsen /A.
Skovgaard BILAG 1.
 SUNDHEDSSTYRELSENS REKOMMANDATION VEDRØRENDE FREMSTILLING AF  

 STRÅLESTERILISEREDE MEDICINSKE UTENSILIER.
Ved fremstilling af strålesteriliserede medicinske utensilier bør den af  

 International Atomic Energy Agency udsendte »Code of Practice for  

 Radiation Sterilization of Medical Products« følges.
Det må dog  

 bemærkes, at der endnu ikke er etableret en officiel kontrolordning i  

 Danmark, og den under punkt 2.1 omtalte inspektion af fabrikations-, pakke-,  

 steriliserings- og lagerlokaler vil derfor først kunne gennemføres, når en  

 sådan kontrolordning er etableret.
Den under punkt 4.1 omtalte godkendelse af  

 bestrålingsanlægget samt den under punkt 5 omtalte godkendelse af den person,  

 som er ansvarlig for, at fremstillingen finder sted i overensstemmelse med de  

 stillede krav, vil ligeledes først kunne finde sted, når en kontrolordning er  

 etableret.
 Den i appendix til punkt 3.2 under punkt 3.2.2 anførte grænseværdi for  

 gennemsnitskimtallet for usteriliseret materiel er af sundhedsstyrelsen  

 fastsat til 50. Ved strålesterilisation af tørt engangsmateriel overvejende  

 bestående af plast bør anvendes en minimumsbestrålingsdosis på 3,5 megarad  

 under forudsætning af, at det anvendte bestrålingsanlægs doser har samme  

 mikrobiologiske effekt som atomenergikommissionens acceleratoranlæg på Risø.
 Hvis gennemsnitskimtallet overskrider denne grænseværdi, bør producenten  

 forsøge at finde årsagen hertil, og med hensyn til det steriliserede materiel  

 forholdes som anført i punkt 3.2.2. Hvis kimtallet mere end en gang i løbet  

 af 50 efter hinanden følgende produktionsdage overstiger grænseværdien, bør  

 dosis øges svarende til nedenstående værdier:
 Ved et gennemsnitskimtal på indtil 500 anvendes en minimumsdosis på 4,5  

 megarad.
 Ved et gennemsnitskimtal på over 500, men under 5000, anvendes en  

 minimumsdosis på 5,0 megarad.
 Materiel, der før sterilisationen er forurenet med så stort et antal kim,  

 at gennemsnitstallet er 5000 eller derover, er ikke anvendeligt til  

 strålesterilisation.
BILAG 2 INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Recommended Code of practice for radiosterilization of medical products 1. INTRODUCTION In common with other methods of sterilization, the efficiency of radiation  

 sterilization is dependent upon the numbers and types of contaminating  

 organisms presented to the process, an also upon the environmental conditions  

 in which they occur.
The choice of radiation dose will be determined by the microbiological  

 standards achieved and by the degree of control that can be exerted upon the  

 pre-sterilization contamination of the products concerned.
In addition to  

 microbiological control procedures, a Code of Practice must also include  

 control procedures for the operation of the radiation facility.
2. MANUFACTURE 2.1. PREMISES, MATERIALS AND PRODUCTION The place of manufacture of each component, places of assembly and  

 packaging of the product, of sterilization and of storage before  

 distribution, should be open to inspection by the appropriate authority.(* 1)  

 The places of manufacture and packaging should be separated from any  

 unrelated industrial processes which might constitute a source of  

 contamination.
Premises should be ventilated with clean air and should have adequate  

 handwashing and toilet facilities.
The construction and furnishing should be  

 conducive to regular and thorough cleaning.
Storage areas should be clean,  

 dry and free from vermin.
 Manufacturing conditions and transport conditions between places of  

 assembly should be such as to minimize contamination of the final product,  

 before sterilization, with pathogens or large numbers of any micro-organisms.
2.2. PERSONNEL Staff engaged in manufacture should be instructed about ways in which  

 contamination can result, and of the importance of a high standard of  

 personal and production hygiene.
They should be supervised in respect of  

 systemic or local disease which might constitute a source of contamination,  

 and in respect of their personal hygiene.
For this purpose medical advice  

 should be available.
2.3. PRODUCTS 2.3.1. The product should be handled as little as possible in the course  

 of processing, and should be as clean as practicable.
 2.3.2. Products should be packaged so as to maintain sterility, and packs  

 should be designed to facilitate aseptic removal of the contents.
 2.3.3. Instructions for storage and handling shall be furnished.
 2.3.4. Labels shall indicate the following:
 Where practicable, this information should be on the individual pack, or,  

 if this is not possible, on the smallest multiple pack.
2.3.5. Sterile and unsterile goods must be kept separate and readily  

 identifiable.
Storage and handling arrangements should be such as to prevent  

 unsterile articles being issued for use.
3. MICROBIOLOGICAL CONTROL 3.1. EFFICIENCY OF THE FACILITY The efficiency of the facility shall be tested on commissioning, and  

 whenever the process is altered, by means of microbiological reference  

 standards.
These microbiological reference standards should comprise at least  

 one with bacteria in the vegetative form and one with endospores of bacteria.
 The microbioligical standard preparations should be obtained through the  

 International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, from a laboratory approved by the  

 Agency.
3.1. NOTE 1. Microbiological reference standards The use of microbiological reference standards is considered necessary  

 because the inactivating effect of ionizing radiation on micro-organisms is  

 not determined by the absorbed dose alone.
The efffect of a given dose may,  

 for example, vary as a consequence of changes in the environment of the  

 organisms before, during or after irradiation.
Also the physical  

 characteristics of the radiation, especially the dose rate, may influence the  

 microbiological effect of a given dose.
The factors that may lead to variation in the microbiological effect of a  

 given dose do not always appear to have the same influence om vegetative  

 bacteria and bacterial spores.
Likewise, differences in species may be of  

 importance.
It is proposed to have at least one microbiological standard with  

 vegetative bacteria and one with bacterial spores.
These reference standards  

 should have a reproducible number of viable units per test piece and a  

 reproducible radiation resistance.
At least three points on the inactivation curves in the dose range  

 commonly use for sterilization should be determined with each microbiological  

 reference standard preparation.
Each point should be determined by counts of  

 survivors in not less than three units of the standard preparation irradiated  

 on at least three separate occasions.
The irradiation should be carried out  

 in a mode similar to that used in the industrial process.
The results should  

 be compared with an inactivation curve for the microbiological reference  

 standard used.
This curve should be forwarded to the irradiation facility  

 together with the microbiological standard preparation.
Possible differences  

 between the measured results and the standard inactivation curve should be  

 taken into consideration in the choice of dose.
Standard curves and records  

 of the measurements should be kept, and made available to the appropriate  

 authority if required.
New measurements should be made whenever the process  

 is altered.
The microbiological reference standards will be determined by the IAEA  

 Committee of Experts.
The standard with vegetative bacteria may consist of  

 test pieces of STREPTOCCUS FAECIUM, strain A2-1 (ATTC. 19581). The standard  

 with endospores may consist of test pieces with spores of BACIILLUS PUMILUS E  

 601.
3.2. CHOICE OF DOSE The choice of dose will be dependent upon the particular item to be  

 sterilized, the microbiological contamination to be found on the item and the  

 margin of safety required for the end-use of the item.
The margin of safety is to be assessed by perusal of the data available  

 concerning the radiation resistance of micro-organisms.
Since the margin of  

 safety for a particular dose is dependent upon the initial number and  

 species, and their resistance in the particular environment, control of the  

 pre-sterilization load is required.
This control should be exerted by  

 quantitative and qualitative examination of the pre-sterilization bacterial  

 contamination of articles selected from finished packaged goods before the  

 sterilization is applied.
Further, the margin of safety should be checked by  

 exposure to the sterilization treatment of suitable test-pieces and of  

 articles deliberately contaminated to the maximum extent within the  

 production premises.
The process must prove effective for these test-peices  

 or articles.
3.2. NOTE 1. Countion of the pre-sterilization bacterial contamination The initial count is defined as the number of viable micro-organisms that  

 can be isolated from the item itself and from the inside of the packaging.
 The determination of the initial count should be made om samples taken  

 randomly from the packaged, non-sterilized items.
The number of initial count determinations should be adjusted to the size  

 of the production batch.
In continuous production not divided naturally into  

 batches, counts should be made on a representative number of units from each  

 independent production line.
In batch production, samples for determination  

 of initial counts can be taken according to a recognized sampling pattern  

 (e.g.
World Health Organization, Techn.
Rep.
Ser.
No. 200 (1960)).
 When the initial counts is used for evaluation of the standard of  

 production hygiene and for the choise of dose, the average count as well as  

 the maximum count per unit should be taken into consideration.
 The average count at any time in continuous production should be  

 calculated on the basis of the counts from that date and those from the  

 preceding nine working days.
For any item the initial count shall be as low as good manufacturing  

 conditions can produce.
When the radiation resistance of micro-organisms  

 isolated from a given product, in conditions approximating to their  

 environment on the product, is regularly examined, the results of such  

 investigations may be included in the considerations of the choice of dose  

 for the product concerned.
The microbiological technique used for initial count determinations should  

 be selected with due regard to the nature of the product.
Whenever a  

 technical failure occurs in the determinations the cause should be traced and  

 recorded, and re-sampling should be done as soon as possible.
3.2. NOTE 2. Choice of dose The minimum dose should be related to the average initial count, as  

 established according to 3.2. Note 1. This will also take into account the  

 desired microbial inactivation factor, which will depent upon the most  

 stringent margin of safety required for the intended use of the product.
The  

 minimum inactivation factor may be decided by the appropriate authority, e.g.  

 for some products an inactivation factor of 10exp5 may be suitable, but for  

 equipment such as blood bank devices a figure of 10exp8 may be required.
If  

 the type and sensitivity of the most resistant organisms contained in the  

 product is not known, reference should be made to the inactivation factors  

 obtained for the most resistant organism under environmental conditions which  

 maximize their resistance (such as the biological reference standard; this  

 standard is now under discussion and will be published by the IAEA in 1968).
The results of the regular examinations of initial counts should be open  

 to appraisal by the regulation authority.
If the average initial count exeeds  

 an agreed limit, and cannot be reduced to the satisfaction of this authority  

 by control af factory hygiene, the dose shall be increased so as to maintain  

 the desired microbial inactivation.
If it is conceivable that, during the period when the limits were exeeded,  

 units of the product have been contaminated with more than ten times the  

 acceptable maximum number of organisms, then the items from that period (at  

 least the item produced on the same day as the most badly contaminated units,  

 plus those from not less than one preceding and three following working days)  

 should be considered non-sterile.
When the excess in counts is less than ten  

 times the permissible limit, the items from the period in question may be  

 considered sterile.
3.2. NOTE 3. Sterility testing Where initial count and desired microbiological inactivation factors have  

 been taken into consideration, conventional sterility testing of material  

 produced in agreement with the present Code of Practice may generally not be  

 necessary.
Under certain circumstances sterility testing may be of value, for  

 instance in the case of complicated devices produced in small numbers.
 The national health authority may require microbiological control of  

 random samples of finished packaged and sterilized goods.
 For these situations in which sterility testing is used, incubation times  

 in the testing media may have to be prolonged as some irradiated  

 micro-organisms have been found to grow slowly or to have a long lag phase.
4. OPERATION OF RADIATION STERILIZATION FACILITIES 4.1. SUITABILITY The irradiation facility to be used must be approved by the appropriate  

 authority as suitable for the purpose intended.
4.2. SAFETY The installation must conform to the safety and health reqiurements laid  

 down in the country of operation, and the energy level of the radiation  

 source should be kept at a level where no hazards due to induced  

 radioactivity can reach the consumer.
4.3. DOSIMETRY Recognized methods of dosimetry must be employed and complete records of  

 results obtained must be kept.
Records should be kept of the various  

 parameters controlling the plant operation.
4.3. NOTE 1. Dosimetry at gamma ray irradiation plants The dose delivered at a particular location in a product package of a  

 given size, conveyed through an irradiation field in a multi-pass mode,  

 depends on the source strength, the conveyor speed, and the densities and  

 atomic numbers of the materials passing through the system for irradiation.
The aim of dosimetry is to make sure that every unit receives at least the  

 required minimum dose and that excessive doses are not given.
The fulfillment  

 of this requirement should be ensured on the commissioning of the plant, and  

 whenever the process parameters are altered, and should be controlled during  

 routine operation.
For a given mode of conveyor operation and a given source geometry, the  

 dose is inversely proportional to the conveyor speed.
The conveyor speed is  

 therefore an important parameter in the dose determination, and it should be  

 ensured that the reproducibility of speed setting and the constancy of the  

 system during operation are within the limits required for obtaining correct  

 dosage.
It should be verified that positive indication is given when the source is  

 in its correct operating position during processing, and that the conveyor is  

 operating properly.
Action should occur automatically when this is not the  

 case.
In order to derive correct setting for the conveyor speed, the dose  

 distribution in a standard package(* 2) has to be evaluated for the given  

 mode of conveyor operation.
Because of the absorption characteristics of a  

 multi-pass geometry, packages in any production run should be of known weight  

 and composition.
The dose distribution may be determined by placing not less  

 than ten dosimeters in a hoomogeneous phantom material of simular density and  

 chemical composition as the production packages, or dosimeters may be placed  

 in a standard production package at specific locations representative of  

 areas which might give the best indication og dose variability.
This  

 procedure should be repeated in order to test the reproducibility of the  

 integrated process.
 Recognized dosimetry systems should be employed, e.g. ferrous sulphate,  

 Fe-Cu sulphate, oxalic acid, and film systems (polyvinyl cloride, coloured or  

 uncoloured polymethyl methacrylate). Systems whose yield is not well known,  

 or systems known to be sentitive to impurities, (e.g. ceric sulphate)  

 dose-rate, irradiation temperature, humidity or other external conditions,  

 should be calibrated under actual working conditions against, for example,  

 ferrous sulphate or by calorimetry.
Once the dose distribution is determined, conveyor settings should be  

 fixed so as to ensure that at least the specified minimum dose is given to  

 all the products.
Provided it has been established that the speed can be set  

 and controlled accurately, the dose distribution can be determined at doses  

 different from those intended for use in production, and conveyor speeds may  

 consequently be calculated by scaling.
 When the process (including materials and packaging) is altered, those  

 parts of the foregoing procedures which are influenced by the alterations  

 should be repeated.
 Once the plant is calibrated and the minimun absorbed dose in the  

 production packages determined as a function of conveyor speed, the routine  

 control may be limited to the following steps:
I.
Positive indication of the correct operational position of the source,  

 as described in 2.2.
II.
Continous-line recording of cenveyor speed, and/or the plant cycle  

 should be monitored by a system mechanically locked to the conveyor drive.  

 The recording paper should be date-marked so that the proper correction  

 factor can be calculated to compensate for the source decay since the time of  

 calibration.
III.
Either the packages should be labelled with a radiation indicator, or  

 the entrance area to the source should be physically separated from the exit  

 area to prevent irradiated and non-irradiated packages from being intermixed.
 In addition to these measures, it is recommended that the dose be  

 regularly checked by including dosimeters in the production packages.
4.3. NOTE 2. Dosimetry at electron irradiation plants The type of accelerator plant referred to in this section is one with the  

 following characteristics:
I.
A scanning system providing a sweep of the electron beam so as to give  

 a homogeneous surface dose distribution over the width of the production  

 package.
II.
A conveyor system which moves the production packages in a direction  

 perpendicular to the beam and scanning directions.
III.
A sweep velocity high enough to ensure good beam-spot overlap on  

 products passing at the highest cemveyor speed.
 With constant beam and scanning, the dose delivered at a particular  

 location in a product package depends on the beam parameters (energy, average  

 current and scan width), the conveyor speed, and the thickness, density and  

 atomic number of the materials placed between the beam exit window and the  

 location in the package.
The aim of dosimetry is to make sure that every item processed receives at  

 least the required minimum dose and that excessive doses are not given.
This  

 should be ensured on the commissioning of the plant and whenever the process  

 parameters are altered, and should be controlled during routine operation.
 Absolute standardization of the beam parameters is not required to obtain  

 correct dosage, although the electron energy should be approximately known in  

 order to evaluate the induced activity hazard.
 The relative levels of the beam parameters, however, are to be monitored  

 continuously whenever the process is to be carried out without dosimeters  

 being attached at minimum dose locations in all packages.
 For a given set of beam parameters, and for a given geometry of the  

 irradiation field, the dose is inversely proportional to the conveyor speed.  

 The conveyor speed is therefore an important parameter in the dose  

 determination, and it should be ensured that the reproducibility of speed  

 setting and the constancy (or corrective regulation, see 3.3.) of the system  

 during operation are within the limits required to obtain correct dosage.
 A system should be provided to deal with a failure of the beam operation  

 (e.g. automatic and immediate shut-down of the product conveyor).
 The beam parameters can be standardized as follows:
Absolute current measurement of the scanned beam can be made by having the  

 electrons absorbed in, for example, an aluminimum absorber thick enough to  

 absorb all the electrons entering it, and by metering the resulting current  

 flowing to ground.
Correction must be made for electrons scattered back from  

 the absorber. (Values for different electron energies and absorber materials  

 may be found in NBS Handbook 97 (1964).) Routine current measurement may be carried out by means of a non-intercept  

 monitor.
A simple technique may be used, e.g. the scanner chamber of the  

 accelerator might be provided with secondary emission plates mounted  

 symmetrically around the beam and collecting electrons back-scattered from  

 the accelerator exit window.
It should be ascertained that the system  

 preferred gives accurate readings which are not significantly influenced by  

 other factors such as minor changes in beam focusing.
Absolute calibaration of the beam energy may be carried out by various  

 methods, such as I. magnetic spectrometry II. threshold-detector methods III.  

 film-stack dosimetry One way of obtaining a relative measure of the electron energy is readily  

 available when the accelerator is fitted with a bending magnet located before  

 the scanning system.
In this case current required to bend the beam by 90  

 degrees (or any other angle chosen) is a relative measure of the electron  

 energy.
If the process parameters are to be integrated into the dosimetry  

 procedure, it should be ensured that the energy remains constant during  

 processing.
A system of secondary emission plates such as referred to above  

 may be used to control this parameter.
If the energy varies, the beam, for a  

 constant current in the bending magnet, will deviate from the angle chosen  

 and thereby cause a greater reponse from one of the plates than from the  

 other.
This system can be made to trigger an alarm or to control an automatic  

 energy-regulation circuit.
Another system is based on the fact that the  

 current necessary to scan the beam over a certain width is a function of the  

 beam energy.
This principle can be applied to a monitoring system by  

 installing two bars or wires at each end of the scanner house (under the exit  

 window) and making the scanned beam strike the inner, but not the outer bars.  

 Whatever method is used, it should be ensured that the response is not  

 influenced significantly by minor changes in other physical factors.
The scan width can be controlled by the bar method referred to above or by  

 an automatic feedback system to the driver circuit.
Deficient operation  

 should cause automatic shut-down of the process.
In order to obtain correct setting of the conveyor speed for a given set  

 af beam parameters, the dose distrubution in the standard production packages  

 should be evaluated.
Because of the absorption characteristics of high-energy  

 electrons, packages in any production run should be of similar weight and  

 composition, and the contents should be homogeneously distributed throughout  

 the package.
The dose distrubution may be determined by placing not less than  

 ten dosimeters in a homogeneous phantom material of similar average density  

 and chemical composition as the production packages, or, better, the  

 dosimeters may be placed at representative location in the production  

 package.
It will normally be found that the part of the package farthest from  

 the beam receives the smallest dose.
This procedure should be repeated in  

 order to test the reproducibility of the integrated process.
Recognized dosimetry systems should be employed.
The low penetration of  

 electron radiation as compared with gamma radiation makes it necessary to use  

 film systems (e.g. polyvinyl chloride, coloured or uncoloured polymethyl  

 methacrylate). As these systems are influenced by external conditions such as  

 temperature, humidity, and dose rate, calibration should be carried out under  

 actual working conditions (e.g. by calorimetry).
 Once the dose distribution is determined for a given set of beam  

 parameters, conveyor settings should be fixed so that the specified minimum  

 dose is delivered to all product locations.
 Whenever the process is altered, those parts of the foregoing procedures  

 which are influenced by the alteration should be repeated.
Once the plant is calibrated and the minimum absorbed dose in the  

 production packages determined as a function of conveyor speed, the routine  

 control may be limited to the following steps: I.
The employment of an  

 interlock system between beam current monitor and conveyor as discribed in  

 3.2. II.
Continuous monitoring and continuous-line recording of current,  

 energy, scan width, and conveyor speed, as described in 3.2. The electron  

 current signal, as monitored by secondary emission plates or some other  

 non-intercept monitor, may be used to feed the conveyor driver circuit,  

 thereby ensuring a constant surface dose.
III.
Either the packages should be  

 labelled with a radiation indicator, or the entrance area to the accelerator  

 room should be physically separated from the exit area in order to prevent  

 irradiated and non-irradiated packages from being intermixed.
 In addition to these measures, it is recommended that the dose be  

 regularly checked by attaching dosimeters to the production packages at the  

 place farthest from the beam.
 Whenever a mixed production (light and heavy packages together) is  

 processed, or whenever monitoring of the production parameters is not carried  

 out according to the requirements listed above, a dosimeter should be  

 attached to each package.
4.4. PROTECTION IN EVENT OF MECHANICAL FAILURE Suitable devices must be provided to ensure that a failure of the  

 mechanical systems does not result in an incorrect dose.
5. SUPERVISION One person should be designated by the management to ensure that the  

 requirements of the Code of Practice for the processes are met.
This person  

 should be designated by name by the management and approved by the  

 appropriate authority, should be of senior status and well qualified by  

 training and experience for this responsibility.
He should have direct access  

 both to production management and top management of his own organization, and  

 to the representative of the appropriate authority.
He should also have the  

 support of a competent microbiologist and physicist, each with adequate  

 laboratory facilities and staff, for microbiological monitoring and for  

 dosimetry, respectively, or he himself might be the microbiologist or  

 physicist.
The formulation of a Code of Practice for the Radiosterilization of  

 Medical Products was first proposed at the International Atomic Energy  

 Agency's Panel Meeting on Radiosterilization of Medical Products,  

 Pharmaceuticals and Bioproducts, which was held in January 1966 in Vienna;(*  

 3) 14 Member States, WHO and ENEA (OECD) were represented.
The Panel Members,  

 bearing in mind the existing legislations in the various Member States, named  

 a working party who were to prepare the first draft recommendations for a  

 Code of Practice.
The members of the working party were J.H.Brewer (USA),  

 E.A.Christensen (Denmark), C.G.Crawford (UK), N.W.Holm (Denmark), F.J.Ley  

 (UK), L.O.Kallings (Sweden); A.Tallentire (WHO), E.Wallauschek (ENEA),  

 F.Antoni and W.Lotz (IAEA).
 The working party meeting was held in London in April 1966. The first  

 draft from the working party was discussed at the Agency Panel Meeting - Code  

 of Practice on the Radiosterilization of Medical Product - which was held in  

 Vienna in December 1966. The Panel's final recommendations for a Code of  

 Practice, as published here, were forwarded to all Member States and WHO for  

 comment, and were then put before the Budapest Symposium for discussion.
 (* 1) Authority is taken to be the appropriate national health authority.
 (* 2) The standard package is here defined as the standard volume unit  

 fitting into the conveyor carrier.
 (* 3) Radiosterilization of Medical Products, Pharmaceuticals and  

 Bioproducts, Report of a Panel, Vienna, 17-19 Jan. 1966, Technical Reports  

 Series No. 72, IAEA, Vienna (1967) 94 pp.
