KONSTRUKTIV BRANDSIKRING Typegodkendelse af materialer og konstruktioner I henhold til gældende bestemmelser skal forskellige materialer og  

 konstruktioner, som indgår i den konstruktive brandsikring i danske skibe,  

 være typegodkendt af statens skibstilsyn.
RESOLUTION A.517(13) adopted on 17 November 1983 RECOMMENDATION ON FIRE TEST PROCEDURES FOR »A«; »B« AND »F« CLASS DIVISIONS THE ASSEMBLY, RECALLING Article 16(j) of the Convention on the International Maritime  

 Organization concerning the functions of the Assembly in relation to  

 regulations concerning maritime safety, NOTING Assembly resolution A.163(ES.IV), entitled »Recommendation for  

 Fire Test Procedures for »A« and »B« Class Divisions', as  

 amended by resolution A.215(VII), RECOGNIZING the need to improve test procedures for determining the  

 compliance of insulating values, as defined in regulation 3(c) and (d) of  

 chapter II-2 of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea,  

 1974, and regulation 3.3 and 3.4 of chapter II-2 of the 1981 and 1983  

 amendments to that Convention, as well as regulation 2(34), 2(35) and 2(37)  

 of chapter I of the Torremolinos International Convention for the Safety of  

 Fishing Vessels, 1977, HAVING CONSIDERED the recommendations made by the Maritime Safety  

 Committee at its forty-eighth session, 1. ADOPTS the Recommendation on Fire Test Procedures  

 for »A«, »B« and »F« Class Divisions, the text  

 of which is annexed to the present resolution, which supersedes the  

 recommendation annexed to resolution A.163(ES.IV) as amended by resolution  

 A.215(VII); 2. INVITES all Governments concerned to apply the  

 revised recommendation in compliance with the relevant definitions in  

 regulation 3 of chapter II-2 of the International Convention for the Safety  

 of Life at Sea, 1974, and the 1981 and 1983 amendments thereto and regulation  

 2 of chapter I of the Torremolinos International Convention for the Safety of  

 Fishing Vessels, 1977.
ANNEX RECOMMENDATION FOR FIRE TEST PROCEDURES FOR »A«, »B« AND »F« CLASS DIVISIONS(* 3) A TESTING 1 GENERAL 1.1 Under the provisions of the International Convention for the Safety of  

 Life at Sea, 1974, and subsequent amendments thereto, and the Torremolinos  

 International Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels, 1977,  

 constructions and materials for use in passenger ships, cargo ships, and  

 fishing vessels as »A« class bulkheads and decks, »A«  

 class doors, »B« class bulkheads, ceilings and decks, »B«  

 class doors, »F« class bulkheads, decks, ceilings and linings and  

 »F« class doors should have an insulating value to the satisfaction  

 of, and be approved by, the Administration.
Such approval will be based on  

 reports from a testing laboratory recognized by the Administration of results  

 obtained from tests carried out on the construction and material in question,  

 and therefore the manufacturer or agent should, if required, submit test  

 specimens and information to the testing laboratory as laid down in section  

 2.
1.2 The dimensions of the structural cores of the test specimens given in  

 section 2 are intended for structural cores of stiffened flat plates of steel  

 or aluminium alloy.
The Administration may require tests to be carried out on  

 specimens having structural cores of materials other than steel or aluminium  

 alloy if such materials are more representative of the construction to be  

 used on board ships.
 1.3 Although both steel and aluminium alloy constructions are included in  

 this test procedure, uninsulated steel bulkheads or decks of suitable  

 scantlings and without openings meet the requirements for »A« class  

 divisions with regard to the passage of smoke and flame whereas uninsulated  

 aluminium alloy bulkheads or decks do not meet the requirements.
 1.4 It is intended that insulating materials which pass the appropriate  

 test for »A« class divisions and »B« class decks may be  

 used in conjunction with constructions of steel or aluminium, whichever is  

 applicable, having heavier scantlings than indicated in section 2.
1.5 A material used to insulate the structural core of a test specimen for  

 an »A« class division and panels of a material used in the  

 construction of a test specimen for a »B« og »F« class  

 division should be tested without paint or other superimposed finish;  

 provided that where such materials and panels are only produced with a  

 superimposed finish, and subject to the agreement of the Administration, such  

 materials and panels may be tested as produced.
Such a material or panels may  

 be required to be tested with a superimposed finish if such a finish is  

 considered by the Administration to have a detrimental effect on the  

 performance of the »A«, »B« or »F« class  

 division of which such a material or panel is part.
2. NATURE; SIZE AND ERECTION OF TEST SPECIMENS 2.1. Insulated »A« class bulkheads 2.1.1. Dimensions of structural core:
 The dimensions of the structural core should be in accordance with figure  

 1 and the following:
 2.1.2 Insulating materials:
 The following materials should be submitted by the manufacturer:
 The identification mark and trade name.
 Principal details of composition.
 Nominal density at ambient temperature.
 Specific heat at ambient temperature.
 Thermal conductivity at ambient temperature.
 2.1.3 Dimensions of panels of insulation material:
 If the insulation medium consists of panels of a material, the test  

 specimen should be constructed of the panels at least one of which is to be  

 the maximum width which may be used in practice, subject to at least one  

 joint being incorporated.
 2.1.4 Drawings:
 A drawing of the test specimen indicating the following should be  

 submitted by the manufacturer:
 Details and dimensions of the structural core.
 Thickness of insulation in way of plating and stiffeners.
 Methods of securing insulation and details of materials used for this  

 purpose.
 Details of joints connections and air gaps, if any.
 2.1.5 The testing laboratory should determine the actual thickness of the  

 insulating material of the test specimen and the density and, where  

 applicable, the water and/or binder content of reference specimens of the  

 insulating material after they have been conditioned in the same manner as  

 specified for the test specimen in 3.1.1.
 The methods of determining these properties should be as specified in 3.3.  

 The reference specimens for sprayed insulating materials should be made when  

 the material is sprayed on the bulkhead panel and they should be sprayed in  

 the vertical position in a similar manner as the bulkhead panel.
2.2 Insulated »A« class decks 2.2.1 Dimensions of structural core:
 The dimensions of the structural core should be in accordance with figure  

 1 and the following:
 2.2.2 Insulation materials:
 The following information should be submitted by the manufacturer:
 Identification mark and trade name.
 Prncipal details of composition.
 Nominal density at ambient temperature.
 Specific heat at ambient temperature.
 Thermal conductivity at ambient temperature.
 2.2.3 Dimensions of panels of insulation material:
 If the insulation medium consists of panels of a material, the test  

 specimen should be constructed of the panels at least one of which should be  

 of the maximum size which may be used in practice, subject to at least one  

 joint being incorporated.
 2.2.4 Drawings:
 A drawing of the test specimen indicating the following should be  

 submitted by the manufacturer:
 Details and dimensions of the structural core.
 Thickness of insulation in way of plating and beams.
 Methods of securing insulation and details of materials used for this  

 purpose.
 Details of joints, connections and air gaps, if any.
 2.2.5 The testing laboratory should determine the actuel thickness of the  

 insulating material of the test specimen and the density and, where  

 applicable, the water and/or binder content or reference specimens of the  

 insulating material after they have been conditioned in the same manner as  

 specified for the test specimens in 3.1.1.
 The methods of determining these properties should be as specified in 3.3.
 The reference specimens for sprayed insulating materials should be made  

 when the material is sprayed on the deck panel and they should be sprayed in  

 the overhead position in a manner similar to the deck panel.
 2.2.6 Light fittings and ventilation units in ceilings forming the  

 insulating medium for »A« class decks:
 The Administration may require tests to be carried out on ceiling  

 constructions which incorporate light fittings and ventilation units in order  

 to verify that the fire performance of the ceilings is not impaired by such  

 fittings and units.
2.3 »A« class doors and frames 2.3.1 General:
 The specimen should be representative of the door and frame to be used on  

 board ships, including the materials and the method of construction.
 2.3.2 Materials of construction:
The door and frame should be constructed of steel or other equivalent  

 material and insulated as necessary to achive the desired standard of  

 insulation.
Door furniture such as hinges, locks, latches, shoot bolts,  

 handles etc. should be constructed of materials having melting points of not  

 less than 950 degrees centigrade.
 2.3.3 Erection of the test specimen:
 2.8.4 Drawings:
 A drawing of the test specimen indicating the following should be  

 submitted by the manufacturer:
 Dimensions and details of the »B« or »F« class  

 bulkhead as appropriate.
 Dimensions and details of the door and frame construction including the  

 clearances between the edges of the door and the doorframe.
 Details of the connection of the frame to the bulkhead.
 Details of hinges, locks, handles, ventilation louvres, escape panels,  

 etc.
 2.8.5 Before the test, the laboratory should determine the actual  

 clearances between the edges of the door and doorframe after the test  

 specimen has been erected.
3 METHOD OF TESTING 3.1 Fire resistance test This test should be carried out with the specimens mentioned in 2.1, 2.2,  

 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7 and 2.8.
 3.1.1 Conditioning of test specimen:
Test specimens should be conditioned to approximately constant weight with  

 an atmosphere of a relative humidity of 55 plus/minus 15 pct. and a  

 temperature of 20 degrees centigrade plus/minus 5 degrees centigrade.
The  

 duration of conditioning a test specimen should be determined by the time  

 taken for the small reference specimen of the insulating material used in the  

 test specimen to attain approximately constant weight in the above  

 atmosphere.
Other reliable methods of verifying that material has reached  

 equilibrium with the specified conditions may be used by the testing  

 laboratory.
After conditioning but before testing the temperature of the  

 specimen should not exceed 40 degrees centigrade.
 3.1.2 Means of fastening specimens in the furnace:
RESOLUTION A.472(XII) adopted on 19 November 1981 IMPROVED RECOMMENDATION ON TEST METHOD FOR QUALIFYING MARINE CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AS NON-COMBUSTIBLE THE ASSEMBLY, RECALLING Article 16(i) of the Convention of the  

 Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization, NOTING that Assembly resolution A.270(VIII) entitled »Recommendation  

 on Test Method for Qualifying Marine Construction Materials as  

 Non-Combustible« is referred to in Regulation 3 of Chapter II-2 of the  

 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, RECOGNIZING the need to improve test procedures for determining whether  

 materials meet the requirements for non-combustible materials as specified in  

 Regulation 3 of Chapter II-2 of that Convention, taking into consideration  

 the continuous improvement in the technology of test equipment and  

 procedures, HAVING CONSIDERED the recommendation made by the Maritime Safety Committee  

 at its forty-fourth session, 1 ADOPTS the improved Recommendation on Test Method for Qualifying Marine  

 Construction Materials as Non-Combustible, the text of which is annexed to  

 the present resolution, which supersedes the Recommendation annexed to  

 resolution A.270(VIII); 2 INVITES all Governments concerned: .1 To apply the improved  

 Recommendation in complying with the definition contained in Regulation 3 of  

 Chapter II-2 of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea,  

 1974; .2 To encourage laboratories concerned to provide information for  

 possible further improvement of this Recommendation, in particular by  

 securing data of the final equilibrium furnace and surface temperatures  

 (section 6.3 of the Recommendation); 3 REQUESTS the Maritime Safety Committee to continue in due time work on  

 this subject with a view to further improving the test method.
ANNEX IMPROVED RECOMMENDATION ON TEST METHOD FOR QUALIFYING MARINE CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AS NON-COMBUSTIBLE 1 SCOPE This document specifies a procedure to be used in assessing materials as  

 meeting the requirements for non-combustible materials as specified in  

 Regulation 3 of Chapter II-2 of the International Convention for the Safety  

 of life at Sea, 1974.
2 FIELD OF APPLICATION The test is intended for marine construction materials.
3 SAMPLING The sample should be sufficiently large to be representative of the  

 material, particularly in the case of non-homogeneous materials.
4 APPARATUS 4.1 Furnace The furnace consists principally of a tube of an aluminia refractory  

 material having a mass density of 3,000 plus/minus 300 kg/cubicmeter and a  

 height of 150 plus/minus 1 mm, with an inner diameter of 75 plus/minus 1 mm  

 and a wall thickness of 10 plus 2/minus 0 mm.(* 6) The overall wall thickness  

 with applied refractory cement to retain the electrical winding should not  

 exceed 13 mm.
The furnace tube is provided with one or more electrical  

 heating coils and is located within an insulated surround, completed with a  

 top and bottom plate of marine board having a thickness of 10 plus/minus 1  

 mm.
To the lower end of the furnace is attached a cone-shaped air flow  

 stabilizer 500 mm long and reducing from a 75 mm internal diameter at the top  

 to a 9 mm internal diameter at the lower end.
The stabilizer can be made of  

 steel sheet, approximately 1 mm thick, and should be finished smooth on the  

 inside, particular attention being given to the smoothness and the tightness  

 of the joint with the furnace which should be provided with a refractory  

 fibre sheet seal.
The upper half height of the stabilizer should be insulated  

 on the outside with a layer of refractory fibrous felt having a nominal  

 thickness of 25 mm.
At the open top of the furnace a draught shield, which  

 may be made of the same material as the stabilizer cone, should be provided  

 having an internal diameter of 75 mm and a height of 50 mm.
The draught  

 shield should be insulated on the outside with a layer of the fibrous felt  

 having a nominal thickness of 25 mm.
Details of the furnace are shown in the  

 working drawings.(* 7) A general representation of the furnace is shown in  

 figure 1.
4.2 Furnace stand The furnace is mounted on a stand with a clearance of approximately 250 mm  

 between the floor and the lower end of the stabilizer.
This clearance must be  

 protected against disturbance by air currents.
An adequate protection can be  

 provided by using shields around the stand to a height of approximately 550  

 mm from the floor.
4.3 Furnace calibration and control A calibrating test with the specimen basket and holder removed should be  

 performed on a new furnace or on an existing furnace when so required.
The  

 energy input to the furnace should be adjusted so that the furnace  

 thermocouple (see 4.5) gives a steady of 750 degrees centigrade plus/minus 10  

 degrees centigrade.
In stabilized conditions the wall temperature at the  

 furnace should be measured by an optical micropyrometer at intervals of 10 mm  

 on three equally spaced vertical axos.
The wall temperature should not vary  

 by more than 50 degrees centigrade over a mid-height length of 100 mm and  

 this should give an average wall temperature of about 850 degrees centigrade.  

 This provides a constant temperature zone for the specimen and can be  

 achieved by having the electric windings spaces as shown in working drawings.  

 Separate windings may optionally be provided at each end of the furnace tube,  

 controlled independently to obtain the constant temperature zone.
To minimize temperature fluctuations in the furnace it is necessary to use  

 a voltage stabilizer in the circuit, able to maintain voltage within  

 plus/minus 5 per cent of the nominal value.
Automatic thermostatic control of  

 the furnace is not to be used during test.
4.4 Temperature measurement Temperatures should be measured by means of insulated sheathed  

 thermocouples having an outside diameter of 1.5 plus/minus 0.1 mm with  

 thermo-electric wires of approximately 0.2 mm diameter.
Before using for  

 test, new thermocouples should be aged in the heated furnace atmosphere to  

 slightly oxidize their outer sheaths.
The temperature should be recorded by  

 an instrument having a measuring range that corresponds with the temperature  

 changes that occur during the tests.
Measurement should be made at intervals  

 of not more than 10 seconds.
The electromotive force temperature conversion  

 process of the recording device use should have an accuracy of at least 0.5  

 per cent, and the thermocouples should have a time constant in the range of  

 15 to 25 seconds.(* 8) 4.5 Location of thermocouples Three thermocouples should be used, the furnace thermocouple to measure  

 the furnace temperature, the surface thermocouple to measure the temperature  

 at the surface of the specimen and the specimen thermocouple to measure the  

 temperature in the centre of the specimen.
The furnace thermocouple should be  

 located with its hot junction 10 plus/minus 0.5 mm from the wall of the  

 furnace and at the mid-height of the constant temperature zone as defined by  

 the wall temperature (see figure 2). A method of maintaining the correct  

 distance from the wall is by the use of a guide attached to the draught  

 shield.
The surface thermocouple should, prior to the test, have its hot  

 junction next to the surface of the specimen at mid-height and be in contact  

 with the specimen.
The specimen thermocouple should be located with its hot  

 junction in the centre of the specimen and should be inserted from the top  

 through a hole of 2 mm diameter.
4.6 Specimen holder and insertion device The specimen is placed in a basket made of nickel-chromium alloy or  

 heat-resisting steel.
At the bottom of the holder, a fine metal gauze in  

 heat-resisting steel should be provided.
The mass of the basket should be  

 between 6 plus/minus 0.2 g.
The holder is suspended from the lower end of an  

 adjustable tube of heat-resisting steel, having an outside diameter of  

 approximately 6 mm and a bore of 4 mm.
The specimen insertion device consists  

 essentially of a metallic sliding rod moving freely in a vertical tube fitted  

 to the side of the furnace.
The heat-resisting steel tube with the specimen  

 holder is fixed by a space bar to the sliding rod.
The design of the  

 insertion device should be such that the specimen can be introduced into the  

 furnace rapidly and without any shock.
The inserted specimen should occupy a  

 specified position in the furnace in the middle of the constant temperature  

 zone and equidistant from the walls.
4.7 Specimen viewing device A mirror should be mounted above the furnace for observation of any  

 evidence of flaming.
It should be mounted in such a way that it is possible  

 to view the specimen continuously following insertion.
5 TEST SPECIMENS 5.1 Preparation of specimens The specimens should be as representative as possible of the average  

 properties of the sample and should be prepared to the size defined in 5.2.
If the thickness of the material is less than 50 mm, the specimen must be  

 made of sufficient layers to achieve the thickness required in 5.2. The  

 layers should occupy a horizontal position and should be held together firmly  

 in the specimen holder.
The density of the specimen should be representative  

 of the density of the material.
 Materials or composite materials which involve thin surface laminations  

 should be tested without such surface laminates unless otherwise specified by  

 the Administration involved.
For composite materials of a thickness such that a number of layers cannot  

 be put together to give a specimen of the specified size as required in 5.2,  

 the specimen should be prepared to the required thickness by proportionally  

 adjusting the thickness of the different components.
The top and bottom faces  

 of the specimen should be the finished faces of the material.
 If it is not possible to follow this procedure to prepare the specimen,  

 tests should be performed on the individual components and reported  

 accordingly.
5.2 Number and size For test purposes, five cylindrical specimens should be prepared as  

 described in 5.1. The nominal dimensions and tolerances for the specimen  

 sizes are as follows:
5.3 Conditioning The specimens should be conditioned in a ventilated oven maintained at 60  

 degrees centigrade plus/minus 5 degrees centigrade for at least 20 hours and  

 cooled to ambient temperature in a desiccator prior to the test.
The weight  

 of each specimen shall be determined before test.
6 PROCEDURE 6.1 Apparatus Before starting the test, it is necessary to ascertain that the whole  

 equipment is in good working order - for example, the stabilizer cone is  

 clean, the insertion device is working smoothly, the specimen holder occupies  

 the exact position in the furnace and the furnace thermocouple is accurately  

 located The equipment should be protected against draughts and not be exposed to  

 direct sunlight or artificial illumination.
The furnace with an empty specimen basket in position (figure 2) should be  

 heated and the furnace temperature stabilized at 750 degrees centigrade  

 plus/minus 10 degrees centigrade.
For a minimum period of 10 minutes before  

 the insertion of a specimen and during the test no adjustment should be made  

 in the energy input to the furnace.
6.2 Insertion of specimens The specimen should be placed in the holder described in 4.6. it should be  

 inserted in the furnace taking not more than 5 seconds for this operation.
6.3 Duration of heating The heating period commences with the insertion of the specimen in the  

 furnace and should be continued for 20 minutes, or until peak temperatures  

 have been passed.
6.4 Test observations A record should be made of the temperature readings from the three  

 thermocouples during the heating period and note taken of the occurrence and  

 duration of any sustained flaming.
The weight of each specimen after test  

 shall be determined.
Sustained flaming shall be taken as continuous presence  

 of flames in the furnace.
6.5 Number of specimens tested The test is carried out on five specimens, prepared as specified in 5.1  

 and 5.2.
7 CLASSIFICATION OF MATERIALS 7.1 Non-combustibility A material should be deemed non-combustible, if:
7.2 Combustibility If one of the four criteria is not satisfied the material is deemed  

 combustible.
8 TEST REPORT RESOLUTION A.214(VII) IMPROVED PROVISIONAL GUIDELINES ON TEST PROCEDURES FOR PRIMARY DECK COVERINGS The Assembly, Nothing Article 16(i) on the Convention on the Inter-Governmental Maritime  

 Consultative Organization concerning the functions of the Assembly, Noting also Regulations 41 and 54 and proposed Regulation 105 of Chapter  

 II of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1960,  

 concerning deck coverings, Noting further Recommendation 11 of the International Conference on the  

 Safety of Life at Sea, 1960, concerning fire test procedures, Recalling Resolution A.165(ES.IV) by which it adopted Provisional  

 Guidelines on Test Procedures for Deck Coverings, Desiring to improve these Provisional Guidelines, Having considered the Recommendation by the Maritime Safety Committee at  

 its twenty-second session, Adopts the Improved Provisional Guidelines on Test Procedures for Primary  

 Deck Coverings as set out at Annex to this Resolution, which supersede the  

 Provisional Guidelines adopted by Resolution A.165(ES.IV), Invites all governments concern to take appropriate steps to give effect  

 to the Improved Provisional Guidelines as soon as possible, Requests the Maritime safety Committee to continue its study on this  

 subject, Authorizes the Maritime Safety Committee to amend the Guidelines if  

 necessary in the light of such study.
ANNEX IMPROVED PROVISIONAL GUIDELINES ON TEST PROCEDURES FOR PRIMARY DECK COVERINGS Foreword 1. The present specification is intended to provide  

 information to Administrations, laboratories and other interested bodies  

 concerning the assessment of requisite properties of primary deck coverings.  

 The work of the Organization in this field has not yet been finalized, and  

 there are certain difficulties in the interpretation of relevant provisions  

 of the 1960 safety Convention.
These guidelines provide improved test  

 procedures for deck coverings and supersede those previously formulated in  

 Resolution A.165(ES.IV), but are still of provisional character.
 2. The fire resistance aspects of deck coverings or  

 primary deck coverings are mentioned in Chapter II of the International  

 Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1960, in three distinct situations,  

 namely: (a) in cargo ships over 4,000 gross tons (Regulation 54(c)); (b) in  

 passenger ships (Regulation 41); (c) in future passenger ships (Regulation  

 105(h)).
3. The test method described in this document is  

 intended to provide guidelines for qualifying primary deck coverings as  

 acceptable with respect to the above referenced requirements.
The method  

 described is only applicable to situations in which a fire occurs in the  

 compartment below the deck.
 4. When doubts exist relative to the fire hazard  

 characteristics of the upper exposed surface of permanently attached deck  

 coverings, Administrations are encouraged to apply such flammability and  

 other test methods considered necessary for their evaluation.
Application 5. The following considerations should be recognized  

 in application of the described test: (a) The test is only required when the  

 thickness of the material applied directly to the steel plate is equal to or  

 exceeds 5 mm.
Thin paint films and bonding agents are exempted from  

 considerations as the material directly applied to the steel plate. (b) In  

 general only the first layer should be tested.
However, in case an  

 Administration considers that some substantial difference of fire performance  

 may result from the application of successive layers then the Administration  

 may consider it desirable to perform qualification tests on the complete  

 assembly. (c) The test is required where the fire insulation to be installed  

 is no more than the minimum specified in parts D and H of Chapter II of the  

 1960 Safety Convention.
If additional insulation is provided the  

 Administration may consider the possibility of acceptance of deck coverings  

 on the basis of a complete fire resistance test in which case a separate test  

 for deck coverings need not be superimposed.
In any case test considered here  

 should be conducted without the use of insulation below the steel plate  

 specimen.
6. The test equipment and procedures described below  

 are intended for determining whether or not deck coverings »readily  

 ignite«, release excessive smoke and/or exude gases which are toxic or  

 combustible.
The methods described are not intended for evaluating the  

 effectiveness of the deck coverings as a portion of the required insulation  

 of an A or B Class division.
For this purpose the fire resistance test is  

 required.
7. It is felt that the attention of Administrations  

 should be specially drawn to the nature of the test which simulates a deck  

 with no protection underneath.
It is important that Administrations should  

 determine the validity of this procedure before applying it to other  

 situations.
When determining the ignitability of deck coverings from a fire  

 source from above a different technique will be required: a simple  

 ignitability or flame spread test would be suitable for this purpose.
Description of specimen 8. The primary deck covering as intended to be tested  

 should be applied to a mild steel plate of a nominal thickness of 5 mm.
The  

 overall size of the steel plate should be such that it exceeds the opening of  

 the furnace by 25 mm plus/minus 5 mm on all sides.
Three specimens should be  

 prepared for test on each type of deck covering.
Conditions of specimen 9. The test specimens should be conditioned to  

 equilibrium with an atmosphere of relative humidity between 40-70 per cent at  

 a temperature of 20 plus/minus 5 degrees centigrade.
Description of furnace 10. The tests should be performed on a furnace with a  

 rectangular horizontal opening with sides measuring 600 mm plus/minus 100  

 internally.
The internal depth of the furnace should be such as to prevent  

 the direct impingement of flames if any to the underside of the specimens,  

 the depth should not be less than 100 mm in any case.
Measurements of furnace temperature 11. The temperature condition within the furnace  

 during a test should be determined by means of at least three rapid response  

 thermocouples positioned, within the opening along one diagonal, one at the  

 centre and the other two at quarter points.
The furnace should be calibrated  

 to ensure as uniform heating as possible.
The hot junctions of the  

 thermocouples should be approximately 50 mm from the underside of the deck  

 specimen.
Furnace control 12. The furnace temperature should be continuously  

 controlled so as to follow the standard time/temperature curve starting at  

 room temperature and defined by a smooth curve drawn through the following  

 points: At the end of the first 5 minutes 538 degrees centigrade At the end  

 of the first 10 minutes 704 degrees centigrade At the end of the first 15  

 minutes 760 degrees centigrade At the end of the first 30 minutes 843 degrees  

 centigrade The accuracy of the furnace control should be such that the area under the  

 curve of the mean furnace temperature should not vary by more than plus/minus  

 10 per cent of the area under the standard curve.
Test flame 13. A test flame, 15-20 mm in length, should be used  

 to measure the ignitability of the deck covering.
A possible arrangement for  

 a test flame is shown in Figure 1. The flame should be of luminous type  

 produced by the combustion of a hydrocarbon gas.
Other suitable means may be  

 employed for the ignition of the gases emitted by the deck covering.
Smoke collection canopy 14. A chamber or canopy for collection of smoke and  

 gases above the specimen should be constructed of steel as defined by the  

 drawings shown in Figures 2 and 3. The number and size of holes as well as  

 the dimensions indicated should be closely complied with.
This canopy may be  

 finished with any heat and corrosion resistant finish desired.
Measurement of light obscuration 15. A photometer for measurement of light transmission  

 through the gases collected by the canopy should be constructed as shown by  

 drawings in Figures 2 and 4. The dimensions shown for the light source and  

 detector should be considered typical rather than critical.
It is, however,  

 highly recommended that the baffle with an aperture of not larger than 5 mm  

 diameter be used as shown.
This device serves to greatly reduce the effects  

 of extraneous light causing errors in transmission measurements.
Both the  

 light source and detector enclosures should be constructed in such a manner  

 that smoke cannot accumulate within them.
16. Figure 5 shows the circuit diagram for connexion  

 of the electrical parts of the system.
One suitable type of light detector  

 used can be of the vacuum photo emissive type with a spectral response  

 roughly corresponding to that of the human eye (an RCA 1P39 tube has been  

 found suitable). As indicated in Figure 5 the resistive load of this detector  

 may be either a circuit component or a part of the measuring instrument but  

 should remain constant for all ranges of instrument sensitivity.
17. The measuring instrument, not shown, should  

 preferable be of the recording type with provision for rapid easy change of  

 measuring voltage sensitivity over three decades.
A recording vacuum tube  

 voltmeter with full scale sensitivity variable in three steps from 0.1 to 10  

 volts would be adequate for this purpose.
18. The lamp used should be operated at approximately  

 its design voltage although small changes in supply voltage may be made to  

 permit adjustment of full scale indication of the measuring instrument in the  

 absence of smoke.
Initial coarse adjustment of output of the photometer  

 circuit may be accomplished either by changes of battery voltage or  

 resistance of the photo detector load circuit.
 19. The smoke measurements are reported in terms of  

 optical density.
fraction of the incident light that is received by the photo detector.
The  

 optical density may be obtained directly by plotting the transmission on the  

 cart Figure 6 and interpolating linearly between the indicated optical  

 density shown.
Test procedure 20. The specimen should be placed to close the furnace  

 opening with the deck covering uppermost.
Precautions should be taken to  

 prevent escape of gases around the edges of specimen.
 21. In arranging the canopy and photometer on the  

 upper surface of the specimen the photometer should be placed to lie across  

 the width or length of the specimen whichever most nearly corresponds to a  

 dimension of 550 mm.
 22. Since draughts blowing across the surface of the  

 specimen during a test would seriously influence smoke measurements,  

 precautions should be taken to ensure that such conditions do not occur  

 during a test.
Test of ignitability 23. Two specimens should be tested without using the  

 smoke collection canopy and each test should be of 15 minutes' duration.
The  

 test flame specified in paragraph 13 should be applied to the top of the deck  

 covering before the commencement of heating and then at one minute intervals  

 from the first evidence of the evolution of gases from the specimen surface.  

 During each application, the test flame or the other device for the same  

 purpose should be moved over the whole surface of the specimen.
Test for smoke production 24. One specimen should be tested and the test should  

 be of a thirty minute duration.
The smoke collection canopy shown in Figures  

 2 and 3 should be placed in position on top of the specimen.
The sensitivity  

 range of the measuring instruments should be changed during the test to  

 maintain the meter deflection at a value greater than 10 per cent of the full  

 scale.
Test for toxic products 25. Spot checks should be made during the test in  

 paragraph 23 to determine the nature of the toxic products given off.
During  

 the course of the test in paragraph 24 samples of gases should be taken at  

 intervals from the central top opening of the canopy.
These may be analyzed  

 directly by colorimetric gas indicators or by other suitable gas analysis  

 methods.
Observations during test 26. The following observations and records should be  

 made during the tests as appropriate: (a) Time of occurrence of any flaming  

 and its characteristics such as location, duration, height, etc. (b) A record  

 of the variation of light transmission through the canopy during the test.  

 The data should be plotted as optical density on a graph as in Figure 6. (c)  

 A record should be kept of the concentration of toxic products measured  

 during the test.
Assessment of performance 27. The performance of the specimens should be  

 indicated under the following headings: (a) Ignitability The deck covering  

 should be classified as »not readily ignitable« if with neither  

 specimen is there any continuous flaming during the 15 minutes' test.
Any  

 flaming continuing for 10 seconds or more after the local application of the  

 test flame should be considered as continuous flaming. (b) Smoke Time of  

 occurrence and duration for which the optical density exceeds values of 1.0  

 and 2.0 should be given. (c) Toxic gases Type of gases and their  

 concentration should be plotted as a function of time.
(* 1) NU IMO Res.
A.517(13) (* 2) NU IMCO Res.
A.472(XII) (* 3) As defined in the International Convention for the Safety of life at  

 Sea. 1974, chapter II-2, part A and the Torremolinos International Convention  

 for the Safety of Fishing Vessels, 1977, chapter II except »F«  

 class divisions are definied only in the latter Convention.
 (* 4) Thin means the minimum thickness which experience shows to be  

 practical for an adequate bond which ensures that the copper disc in contact  

 with the surface of the test specimen.
 (* 5) Improved Recommendation on Test Method for Qualifying Marine  

 Construction Materials as Non-Combustible.
(* 6) Evidence shows that the material used for the refractory furnace  

 tube and its fabrication may influence the experimental results.
This part of  

 the furnace should be obtained from the source shown on the drawings and  

 comply with the specifications.
 (* 7) Copies of the working drawings of the apparatus may be obtained from  

 the IMCO Secretariat.
 (* 8) Time constant is expressed as the time to reach 63.2 per cent of the  

 final temperature value heating in the furnace (750 degrees centigrade).
 (* 9) As established before inserting the specimen (see 6.1).
