RECOMMENDATION ON INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED IN THE MANOEUVRING BOOKLETS The Assembly, Noting Article 16(i) of the Convention on the Inter-Governmental Maritime  

 Consultative Organization concerning the functions of the Assembly, Recalling Resolution A.160(ES.IV) by which it adopted the Recommendation  

 on Data Concerning Manoeuvring Capabilities and Stopping Distances of Ships, Desiring to ensure uniformity in the information to be included in the  

 manoeuvring booklets available on board, particularly in large ships and  

 ships carrying dangerous chemicals in bulk, Having examined the Recommendation by the Maritime Safety Committee at its  

 twenty-first session, Adopts the Recommendation on Information to be Included in the Manoeuvring  

 Booklets, the text of which appears at Annex to this Resolution, Invites all governments concerned to take steps to give effect to this  

 Recommendation as soon as possible.
ANNEX RECOMMENDATION ON INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED IN THE MANOEUVRING BOOKLETS In pursuance of Assembly Resolution A.160(ES.IV) Administrations are  

 recommended to require that manoeuvring booklets containing the information  

 given herewith are on board and available to the masters of large ships.  

 Administrations should consider to what extent it may also be applicable to  

 masters of small ships, especially ships carrying dangerous chemicals.
 The booklet should consist of two parts as follows:
Part 1 - Manoeuvring data and/or diagrams Part 2 - Supplementary information 1. Manoeuvring data and/or diagrams The following information should be contained in Part 1 of the booklet:
 It is recommended that, where necessary, as much of this information as  

 possible should be presented in diagrammatic form, such as the diagram for  

 »Turning Circle« and »Stopping Curves« shown below.
It is recognized that all the necassary information may not be available  

 at the time of the original trials and some of the data may have to be  

 obtained after the ship is in service.
However, the basic information should  

 be completed as soon as practicable.
Furthermore, it is recommended that the  

 booklet should be in such a form that additional data for each manoeuvre  

 could be added and that shipmasters be encouraged to add to this basic  

 information as they gain experience in the handling of the vessel in  

 conditions not covered by the original data.
 Copies of the appropriate diagrams should be posted on the bridge.
All data provided should be for calm weather, no current and deepwater  

 conditions with clean hull.
These facts should be clearly noted on the data  

 displayed with a warning that the vessel's response may significantly change  

 under different conditions, including shallow water.
2. Supplementary information The attention of masters is drawn to the following points which should be  

 considered in relation to the safe handling of the ship:
