Sikker adgang til og arbejde i store tanke og sikker adgang til og arbejde  

 i bulk carriers store lastrum Vedrørende IMCO Resolution A. 272 (VIII) Direktoratet skal herved meddele, at den mellemstatslige rådgivende  

 søfartsorganisation (IMCO) har vedtaget en resolution om rekommandation om  

 sikker adgang til og arbejde i store tanke og rekommandation om sikker adgang  

 til og arbejde i bulk carriers store lastrum.
 Direktoratet skal henstille, at rederierne i videst mulige omfang følger  

 de omhandlede rekommandationer, der findes som ANNEX I og II til  

 resolutionen.
 Ovennævnte IMCO Resolution A 272 (VIII) forhandles af IMCO Secretariat,  

 Publication Section, 101-104 Picadilly, London WIV OAE, under sales No.  

 74.04.E.
 Resolutionens ordlyd er følgende:
Recommendation on safe access to and working in large tanks, and  

 recommendation on safe access to and working in large cargo holds of bulk  

 carriers The assembly, NOTING Article 16(i) of the Convention on the Inter-Govenmental Maritime  

 Consultative Organization concerning the functions of the Assembly, RECOGNIZING that with the increasing size of tankers and bulk carriers and  

 the associated increase in the dimensions of tanks and cargo holds of such  

 vessels, there is a need for improving safe access to and working in those  

 spaces, HAVING CONSIDERED the Recommendation by the Maritime Safety Committee at  

 its twenty-sixth session, ADOPTS the Recommendation on Safe Access to and Working in Large Tanks and  

 the Recommendation on Safe Access to and Working in Large Cargo Holds of Bulk  

 Carriers, the texts of which are set out in the Annexes to this Resolution, AGREES that in respect of Ore/Bulk/Oil Carriers or Ore/Oil Carriers, the  

 more stringent requirements of the two Recommendations should apply,  

 according to the nature of the carriage and the characteristics of the space  

 in question, INVITES all govements concerned to take steps to give effect to the  

 Recommendations as soon as possible.
Annex I Recommendation on safe access to and working in large tanks Safe access to cargo tanks can only be provided on the assumption that an  

 adequate standard of tank cleaning and ventilation is achieved prior to  

 entry.
Sludge accumulation on platforms and ladders should be kept to a minimum  

 consistent with operational practice.
Where appropriate, consideration should  

 be given to preventing the build-up of sludge on access platforms and  

 horizontal structures in general by suitable design of tank structure and  

 positioning of washing machines.
Sludge accumulation on the tank bottom  

 should be controlled by an efficient tank draining system.
No personnel  

 should enter any cargo tank without a suitable breathing apparatus before the  

 air in the tank has been tested by a responsible officer using an approved  

 gas measuring device and found to be free of gas, containing sufficient  

 oxygen and safe for inspection or work.
 An adequate supply of fresh air is to be available for all men working  

 within a tank having due regard to the nature and location of the work.
ACCESS TO TANKS 1. (a) Tanks, and subdivisions of tanks, having  

 lengths of 35 metres and above should be fitted with at least two access  

 hatchways and ladders, as far apart as praticable longitudinally.
ACCESS WITHIN TANKS 2. (a) Where one or more wash bulkheads are fitted in  

 a tank they should be provided with openings not less than 600 mm x 800 mm  

 and so arranged as to facilitate the access of persons wearing breathing  

 apparatus or carrying a stretcher with a patient.
CONSTRUCTION OF LADDERS 3 (a) In general, the ladders should not be inclined at an angle exceeding  

 70 degrees.
The flights of ladders should not be more than 9 metres in actual  

 length.
Resting platforms of adequate dimensions should be provided.
RESCUE AND EVACUATION ARRANGEMENTS 4. (a) For fast evacuation of injured personnel aut of  

 a tank, the following equipment should be provided:
Annex II Recommendation on safe, access to and working in large cargo holds of bulk  

 carriers Safe access to cargo holds can only be provied on the assumption that  

 adequate ventilation of the holds is provided for the protection of personnel  

 prior to their entry.
Consideration should be given to preventing the  

 accumulation of hazardous or noxious vapours in the holds by appropriate  

 ventilation.
No personnel should enter a hold that has been battened down for  

 a long time or poorly ventilated before the oxygen content of the air in the  

 hold has been observed by a responsible officer using an oxygen meter or  

 equivalent device and found to be safe for inspection or work.
 An adequate supply of fresh air is to be available for all men working  

 within the cargo hold having due regard to the nature and location of the  

 work.
ACCESS TO CARGO HOLDS 1. (a) If separate hatches are used as access to the  

 ladders required by paragraph 2, each hatch should have a clear opening of at  

 least 600 mm x 600 mm.
ACCESS WITHIN CARGO HOLDS 2. (a) Each cargo hold should be provided with at  

 least two ladders as far apart as practicable longitudinally.
If possible  

 these ladders should be arranged diagonally, e.g. one ladder near the forward  

 bulkhead on the port side, the other one near the aft bulkhead on the  

 starboard side, from the ships centreline.
CONSTRUCTION OF LADDERS 3. In general, the design and construction of fixed  

 ladders should be in conformity with the requirements described in Proposed  

 Recommendation on Safe Access to and Working in Large Tanks.
However,  

 arrangements and strength of ladders should be suitable for the types of  

 cargo likely to be carried.
In particular, having regard to the construction  

 of the hold, and the nature of the cargoes carried, vertical ladders may be  

 acceptable in bulk and combined carriers.
RESCUE AND EVACUATION ARRANGEMENTS 4. Equipment as specified in paragraph 4 of Proposed  

 Recommendation on Safe Access to and Working in Large Tanks should be  

 provided for the evacuation of injured personnel from cargo holds.
