SCHEME FOR THE RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF TESTS AND INSPECTIONS CARRIED OUT ON SHIPS' EQUIPMENT//In force since 1st January 1971 Revised June 1975 (reprinted September 1977) Published by THE EUROPEAN FREE TRADE ASSOCIATION 9-11, rue de Varembede, CH-1211 Geneve 20 Table of contents 1. General information on the Scheme 2. The text of the Scheme 3. Appendix: List of Participating Authorities 4. Common requirements for:
lifeboat engines electro-hydraulic steering gear for passenger ships the design and construction of lifeboat davits and winches glass-fibre reinforced plastic lifeboats inflatable life-rafts lifeboat covers (canopies) non-portable fire extinguishers compasses pilot hoists, performance standards self-contained breathing apparatus for the use of firemen in ships totally enclosed lifeboats gangways and accommodation ladders including platforms life-jackets type testing of fire alarm cabinets and electrical component parts for  

 fire alarm and detection systems COMMON REQUIREMENTS AGREED BY PARTICIPATING AUTHORITIES Title Date of In force between entry Participating into force Authorities  

 of Common requirements 1st October Denmark, Finland, for lifeboat 1972 Norway, Portugal, engines Sweden, Yoguslavia 6th November United Kingdom 1972 4th July 1973  

 Iceland 16th May 1979 Fed.Rep. of Germany 30th May 1979 the Netherlands Common requirements 1st July 1973 Denmark, Finland, for electro-hydraulic Iceland, Norway, steering gear for Portugal, Sweden, passenger ships United Kingdom, Yugoslavia 14th June 1978 the Netherlands Common requirements 1st July 1973 Denmark, Finland, for the design and Iceland, Norway, construction of lifeboat Portugal, Sweden, davits and wihes United Kingdom, Yugoslavia 14th June 1978 the Netherlands Common requirements 1st July 1973 Denmark,Finland, for g.r.p. lifeboats Iceland, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, United Kingdom,  

 Yougoslavia 30th May 1979 the Netherlands Common requirements 1 July 1973 Denmark, Finland, for inflatable life- Iceland, Norway, rafts Portugal, Sweden, United Kingdom, Yugoslavia 14 June 1978 the  

 Netherlands Common requirements 1 May 1974 Denmark, Finland, for lifeboat covers Iceland, Norway, Common requirements 1 March 1975 Denmark, Finland, for non-portable Iceland, Norway, fire extinguishers Portugal, Sweden, United Kingdom, Yugoslavia 14 June  

 1978 the Netherlands Common requirements 1 March 1975 Denmark, Finland, for compasses Iceland, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, United Kingdom,  

 Yugoslavia 14 June 1978 the Netherlands 16 May 1979 Fed.
Rep. of Germany Common requirements 1 May 1976 Denmark, Finland, for pilot hoists, Iceland, Norway, performance standards Portugal, Sweden, United Kingdom, Yugoslavia 14 June  

 1978 the Netherlands 16 May 1979 Fed.
Rep. of Germany Common requirements 15 June 1976 Denmark, Finland, for the approval and Iceland, Norway, testing of self- Portugal, Sweden, contained breathing United Kingdom, apparatus for the Yugoslavia use of firemen in ships 14 June 1978 the Netherlands 16 May 1979 Fed.
Rep. of Germany Common requirements 20 November Finland, Iceland, for totally enclosed 1976 Norway, Portugal, lifeboats Sweden, United Kingdom, Yugoslavia 16 May 1978 Denmark 30 May  

 1979 the Netherlands Common requirements 20 November Denmark, Finland, for the design and 1976 Iceland, Portugal, construction of gang- Sweden, ways and accom- United Kingdom, modation ladders Yugoslavia including platforms Common requirements 1 November Denmark, Finland, for life-jackets 1979 the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom 28  

 May 1980 Yugoslavia Common requirements 1 December Denmark, Finland, for type testing of 1984 Iceland, the fire alarm cabinets Netherlands, and electrial Norway, Portugal, component parts for Sweden, fire alarm and United Kingdom, detection systems Yugoslavia GENERAL INFORMATION ON THE SCHEME Since 1st January 1971 the authorities competent to approve or accept  

 ships' equipment in relation to national regulations in Denmark, Finland,  

 Iceland, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, the United Kingdom and Yogoslavia operate  

 a Scheme for the Reciprocal Recognition of Tests and Inspections carried out  

 on Ships' Equipment.
The Netherlands authority became a member of the Scheme  

 on 20th August 1976 and the authority from the Federal Republic of Germany on  

 8th February 1978. For the purpose of the Scheme, ships' equipment means any  

 equipment, including lifesaving appliances and fire-extinguishing equipment,  

 which is subject to approval or acceptance by a Participating Authority in  

 the Scheme.
The Purpose and principles of the Scheme The purpose of the Scheme is to facilitate trade in ships' equipment.
It  

 allows certain tests and inspections required by a Participating Authority of  

 the importing country to be carried out by a Participating Authority of the  

 exporting country.
Exporters are thus saved the cost and time required of  

 having a surveyor from the importing country sent to undertake the tests and  

 inspections in the exporting country or to send samples of the ships'  

 equipment intended for export to the importing country for testing and  

 inspection.
No harmonization of the technical regulations of the countries adhering to  

 the Scheme, nor of their test procedures, is provided for under the Scheme.  

 Any items of ships' equipment to be exported to another country participating  

 in the Scheme have to comply with the requirements of the Participating  

 Authority of that country.
The test procedures prescribed by the importing  

 country shall also be followed.
Common requirements The Participating Authorities have found, however, that the practical  

 application of the Scheme would be facilitated if regulations and provisions  

 which are commonly agreed between the countries adhering to the Scheme, were  

 compiled and published.
Such publication would also facilitate the  

 manufacturing of goods for export to other countries adhering to the Scheme.  

 Therefore the Participating Authorities have established »common  

 requirements« for some items of ships' equipment.
The common  

 requirements are not international standards.
Their purpose is not to replace  

 the national requirements in force in the countries adhering to the Scheme  

 but rather to express the common features, the »least common  

 denominator«, of these national requirements.
Therefore common  

 requirements do not preclude a Participating Authority from having other  

 requirements additional to the common requirements.
Anyone who intends to  

 avail himself of the facilities of the Scheme is advised to ask the  

 Participating Authority of the importing country if there are any national  

 requirements additional to the common requirements.
How to profit from the facilities offered by the Scheme A person or enterprise wishing to obtain approval or acceptance of ships'  

 equipment from another country participating in the Scheme or his authorized  

 representative shall, by referring to the Scheme, forward to the  

 Participating Authority whose approval or acceptance he wishes to obtain,  

 designs and specifications in respect of that equipment.
He shall also  

 provide details of possible certification of the equipment he is intending to  

 export by the authorities of other countries.
The procedure required by the  

 Participating Authority whose approval or acceptance is requested shall be  

 observed.
The Participating Authority whose approval or acceptance has been  

 requested will then declare to the Participating Authority which is to  

 undertake the tests and inspections whether the designs and specifications  

 are in accordance with its regulations or are otherwise acceptable to it.
The  

 Participating Authority in the importing country whose approval or acceptance  

 is requested may request the Participating Authority in the exporting country  

 to undertake on its behalf inspections of the production facilities of the  

 manufacturer, surveillance of production, inspection and tests of the  

 prototype and issuance of reports, certificates and other documentary  

 materiel to the extent that such tests and inspections are required by the  

 Participating Authority whose approval or acceptance is requested.
The Participating Authority which has carried out these operations shall  

 submit the reports and certificates to the Participating Authority on whose  

 behalf they have been undertaken.
The latter will, if satisfied, grant final  

 approval or acceptance of the relevant items of ships' equipment, requesting  

 the other Participating Authority to test, inspect and report on subsequent  

 production of the item of equipment which has been approved or accepted.
 It should be noted that the initial inspection of production facilities  

 and inspection and tests of the prototype may be carried out by the  

 Participating Authority whose approval or acceptance is requested.
Fees The Participating Authority which carries out tests and inspections on  

 behalf of the importing authority may collect from the person or enterprise  

 exporting the equipment such fees and expenses as it deems appropriate to  

 cover the service.
SCHEME FOR THE RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF TESTS AND INSPECTIONS CARRIED OUT ON SHIPS' EQUIPMENT The purpose of this Scheme is to facilitate trade in ships' equipment by  

 allowing certain tests and inspections required by a Participating Authority  

 of the importing country to be carried out by another Participating Authority  

 of the exporting country.
Explanation of terms 1. For the purpose of this Scheme:
Submission of designs and specifications 2. A person wishing to export ships' equipment or a  

 person authorized by him shall:
and Approval of designs and specifications; inspections and tests 3. The Participating Authority whose approval or  

 acceptance has been requested shall, without undue delay, declare to the  

 Participating Authority specified in accordance with paragraph 2(b), if it so  

 finds, that the designs and specifications submitted to it are in accordance  

 with its regulations or are otherwise acceptable to it and shall at the same  

 time request the latter Participating Authority to undertake, on its behalf,  

 such of the following operations as it finds appropriate to the facilities of  

 that authority:
Reports, certificates and other documentary material 4. The reports, certificates and other documentary  

 material referred to in paragraph 3(d) shall be submitted by the  

 Participating Authority which has carried out the operations to which they  

 relate, to the Participating Authority on whose behalf they have been  

 undertaken.
Upon receipt of these reports, certificates and other documentary  

 material the latter Participating Authority shall, if satisfied, grant  

 without undue delay such final approval of the ships' equipment to which they  

 relate as is laid down in its regulations or otherwise indicate its  

 acceptance.
Refusal of final approval 5. Nothing in this Scheme shall prevent the  

 Participating Authority whose approval or acceptance has been requested from  

 refusing final approval to or acceptance of any ships' equipment tested and  

 inspected under this Scheme if it has reason to believe that such equipment  

 is not in conformity with its regulations.
Refusal of final approval or  

 acceptance and the reasons therefor shall be notified, without undue delay,  

 to the Participating Authority which has carried out the operations referred  

 to in paragraph 3 above.
Participation by other authorities 6. (a) This Scheme is open for participation by an  

 administration in another country which is competent to approve or accept  

 ships' equipment in relation to national regulations (requesting authority).  

 Requests for participation expressing willingness to accept this Scheme,  

 together with a description of the regulations governing approval of designs  

 and specifications, inspections and tests, shall be addressed to the  

 Secretary-General of EFTA who shall notify this to all Participating  

 Authorities.
Amendments 7. This Scheme may be amended by mutual agreement  

 between the Participating Authorities.
Consultations between Participating Authorities 8. Representatives of the Participating Authorities  

 shall meet from time to time to discuss matters of common interest relating  

 to the operation of this Scheme.
 9. Such meetings shall be convened by the  

 Secretary-General of EFTA whenever necessary, but at least once a year or  

 upon request in writing indicating the reason for the meeting from two or  

 more Participating Authorities in different countries.
Establishment of common requirements 10. In order to facilitate the application of this  

 Scheme Participating Authorities may establish common requirements for items  

 of ships' equipment.
11. A common requirement shall not preclude a  

 Participating Authority from having other requirements additional to the  

 provisions therein.
Common requirements may be amended by general agreement  

 of the Participating Authorities concerned.
12. A Participating Authority may at any time withdraw  

 from a common requirement by notification to the Secretary-General.
Any  

 Participating Authority wishing to withdraw shall whenever practicable give  

 reasonable notice to the other Participating Authorities of its intention to  

 do so.
The common requirement shall continue to apply as between those  

 Participating Authorities which have not withdrawn from it.
 13. The Secretary-General shall notify all  

 Participating Authorities of the common requirements as well as of any  

 amendments and withdrawals, and, from time to time, circulate a list of the  

 requirements so far issued.
Withdrawal 14. A Participating Authority may withdraw from this  

 Scheme by giving six months' notice in writing to the Secretary-General, who  

 shall notify all other Participating Authorities.
On withdrawal of a  

 Participating Authority the Secretary-General shall revise the Appendix and  

 circulate it to each Participating Authority.
SCHEME FOR THE RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF TESTS AND INSPECTIONS CARRIED OUT ON SHIPS' EQUIPMENT APPENDIX LIST OF PARTICIPATING AUTHORITIES DENMARK Direktoratet for Statens Skibstilsyn (The Danish Government Ships  

 Inspection Service) Snorresgade 19 DK-2300 København S Tel.: 1-547131 Telex  

 31141 FINLAND Merenkulkuhallitus (National Board of Navigation)P.O.
Box 158  

 SF-00141 Helsinki 14 Tel.: (90) 18081 Telex 121471 GERMANY Fed.Rep. of See-Berufsgenossenschaft (Board of Ships' Safety and  

 Social Security) Reimerstwiete 2, D-2000 Hamburg 11 Tel.: 361371 Telex  

 02-11084 ICELAND Siglingamalastofnun rikisins (State Directorate of Shipping)  

 Hamarshus Tryggvagoetu P.O.
Box 484 Reykjavik Tel.: 258 44 No telex NETHERLANDS Nederlandse Scheepvaartinspectie (Netherlands Shipping  

 Inspection) Directoraat-general Scheepvaart en Maritieme Zaken (Directorate  

 General Shipping and Maritime Affairs) Bordewijkstraat 4, P.O.
Box 5817  

 NL-2280 HV Rijswijk (Z.H.) Tel.: 070-949420 Telex 31040 NORWAY Sjøfartsdirektoratet (Norwegian Maritime Directorate) Thv.  

 Meyersgt. 7 P.O.
Box 8123 N-Oslo Dep.
Tel.: 350250 Telex 76997 PORTUGAL Inspeccao-Geral de Navios (General Inspectorate of Shipping)  

 Secretaria de Estado da Marinha Mercante Av.
Barsilia P-1300 Lisboa Tel.: 66  

 95 03 Telex 18533 SWEDEN Sjoefartsverket Centralfoervaltning (National Swedish  

 Administration of Shipping and Navigation) Slottsgatan 82 FACK S-601 78  

 Norrkoeping Tel.: 011/19 10 00 Telex 64380 UNITED KINGDOM Department of Transport Marine Directorate Sunley House 90  

 High Holborn GB-London WC1V 6LP Tel.: 01-405 6911 Telex 2640 84 YUGOSLAVIA Jugoslavenski Registar Brodova (Yugoslav register of shipping)  

 Marasovica 67 P.O.
Box 257 YU-58000 Split Tel.: (058) 48 955 Telex 26129 COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR LIFEBOAT ENGINES In force since 1st October 1972 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS As SOLAS Chapter III Regulation 9(a)(i)-(iii).
2. STARTING ARRANGEMENTS 2.1 Starting mechanism Hand starting or an approved starting device.
Crank handles shall  

 disengage automatically when the engine starts.
2.2 Standard starting At -1 degrees C direct by handcrank and/or other mechanical devices.
2.3 Cold temperature starting Lifeboat engines required to start and operate at temperatures below -1  

 degrees C may be fitted with special starting aids.
3. RUNNING COMDITIONS 3.1 Running capability when submerged to centre line of crankshaft.
 3.2 Running capability at 10 degrees list either way and for 10 degrees  

 trim either way.
4.ENGINE CASING Fire-resistant; sufficient ventilation for air-cooled engines.
 5. FUEL TANKS AND FITTINGS Substantially constructed;  

 securely fixed; suitable arrangements for filling, vapour venting and relief;  

 no soft solder for tightness of tank, fittings and piping; external  

 anti-corrosion protection of steal tanks; tank tested to 4 m head of water;  

 cock at tank end af fuel pipe; piping and fittings of steel, copper, bronze  

 or other suitable incombustible material.
6. COOLING WATER PUMPS Self-priming; not damaged by being run dry for 5 min (boat in davits).
7. INLET AND EXHAUST PIPE 7.1 Inlet and exhaust to terminate at sufficient height; inlet to be  

 protected against ingress of water.
 7.2 Insulation or cooling required for hot parts of exhaust pipe.
8. FENCING OF MOVING PARTS Adequate protection to be provided.
9. DETAILED MATERIAL AND DIMENSIONAL SPECIFICATIONS Participating Authorities may accept the detailed material and dimensional  

 specifications of recognized classification societies.
10. SPARES Box of spare parts, tools and instruction book to be provided.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRO-HYDRAULIC STEERING GEAR FOR PASSENGER SHIPS (Only SI units are used in the common requirements given in the following  

 pages.
The table below sets out the corresponding metric and imperial units) Paragraph SI unit Metric unit Imperial unit 4.2 7,0 MPa 71,4 kp/sq.cm 1015 lbf/sq.in COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRO-HYDRAULIC STEERING GEAR FOR PASSENGER SHIPS In force since 1st July 1973 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. GENERAL Electro-Hydraulic steering gears shall comply with the requirements of  

 SOLAS, Chapter II - 1.
2. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO THE DESIGN AND EQUIPMENT  

 OF ELECTRO-HYDRAULIC STEERING GEARS 2.1 Steering gears shall be provided with devices for the relief of  

 excessive pressure.
2.2 An efficient locking or braking arrangement shall be fitted to keep  

 the rudder steady in the event of an accident or when a change of gear is  

 required.
Such arrangements may be omitted if the steering gear is of a  

 self-locking type.
 2.3 Steering gears shall be arranged as necessary with means for stopping  

 the gear before the rudder stops are reached.
 2.4 Indicators showing when the power units of the steering gear are  

 running shall be provided and arranged in suitable positions on the  

 navigating bridge and in the machinery space or machinery control room.
 2.5 Fluids used in the hydraulic systems of steering gears shall, when  

 necessary, be non-freezing.
3. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO AUXILIARY STEERING GEAR 3.1 The strength of the principal components of auxiliary steering gear  

 shall be not less than would be required for a main steering gear, assuming  

 the ships' speed to be not less than 12 kn.
 3.2 Power operated auxiliary steering gear shall be capable of putting the  

 rudder over from 20 degrees on either side to 20 degrees on the other side in  

 60 s at half full speed or 8 kn whichever is the greater.
4. SURVEY 4.1 Survey of steering gears during construction shall include material  

 tests of the principal forgings, steel castings and piping systems.
4.2 Survey of steering gears during construction shall include hydraulic  

 tests on the various parts of the hydraulic system.
The hydraulic test  

 pressure shall not be less than 1,5 times the pressure at which the relief  

 valve is set to lift; however, the test pressure need not exceed the maximum  

 working pressure by more than 7,0 MPa.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF LIFEBOAT DAVITS AND WINCHES (Only SI units are used in the common requirements given in the following  

 pages.
Except for the units of lenght the table below sets out the  

 corresponding metric and imperial units) Paragraph SI unit Metric unit Imperial unit 2.1 75 kg 75 kg 165 lb 3.6 1500 kg 1500 kg 3307 lb 4.4 0,3 m/s and 0,3 m/s and 1 ft/s and 0,6 m/s 0,6 m/s 2 ft/s 8.1 1000 kg 1000 kg 2200 lb 0,3 m/s 0,3 m/s 1 ft/s COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF LIFEBOAT DAVITS AND WINCHERS In force since 1st July 1973 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. GENERAL 1.1 Requirements of SOLAS Chapter III regulations 29 and 36 to be applied.
 1.2 Gravity, luffing and single arm davits with appropriate winch gear are  

 considered.
2. DEFINITIONS 2.1 Working load of davits is sum of weight of boat, equipment, blocks and  

 fall and maximum number of persons which the lifeboat is deemed fit to carry,  

 the mass of each being taken to be 75 kg.
 2.2 Working load of winch is maximum load when lowering, hoisting, or  

 stowing but not less than working load of davits divided by velocity ratio of  

 tackle.
3. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR DAVITS 3.1 Calculated combined stresses to result in factor of safety at least  

 4.5 on U.T.S. of material.
To be based on least favourable list and trim  

 conditions as stated in 1.1.
3.2 Minimum material thickness 6 mm.
Adequate protection against corrosion  

 required.
 3.3 Certification of material quality to be provided.
 3.4 Gravity davits require positive turning out moment during whole davit  

 travel with vessel upright and listed up to 25 degrees either way.
 3.5 Trackways to be inclined at not less than 30 degrees to the  

 horizontal.
 3.6 The working load of any single arm davit shall not exceed 1500 kg.
4. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR WINCHES 4.1 Calculated factor of safety not less than 4,5 on U.T.S. of material.
 4.2 Certification of material quality to be provided.
 4.3 Fleet angle not more than 5 degrees for grooved drums and 3 degrees  

 for ungrooved drums.
4.4 Hand brake and automatic brake required.
Automatic brake to control  

 speed of descent between 0,3 m/s and 0,6 m/s.
4.5 Hand recovery required.
Crank handles not to be rotated when boat is  

 lowered or hoisted by power.
Facility to manually unwind falls required.
 5. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR BLOCKS ETC.
5.1 Factor of safety of at least 5 based on the U.T.S. of materials used  

 for blocks.
Sheave diameter at least 12 times rope diameter.
5.2 Links, chains and shackles to be of steel and manufactured to  

 appropriate national code.
A factor of safety of at least 5, based on  

 breaking strenght, must be ensured.
5.3 Breaking strenght of wire rope not less than 6 times maximum load on  

 rope.
Test certificate required for wire rope falls.
6. TESTS OF DAVITS AT MANUFACTURERS WORKS 6.1 Prototype gravity davits shall be tested on a tilting platform.
The  

 tests shall provide for These tests to be carried out using a load which simulates the weight  

 supported by the davits when turning out the lifeboat, together with its  

 equipment, blocks and falls from the stowed position.
Thus in a two arm davit  

 set each arm is to be loaded with one-half such a load.
6.2 Every davit with its arm at full out-reach shall be capable of  

 withstanding a static load test of not less than 2.2 times that part of the  

 working load supported by the arm.
This test to be carried out in upright and  

 no trim condition.
Deflection of davit structure to be measured.
 6.3 Proof test on horns not less than 2.5 times their working load.
 6.4 Proof test on lower fall blocks not less than 2.5 times working load  

 on block.
7. TESTS OF WINCHES AT MANUFACTURERS WORKS 7.1 Prototype winches to receive extended test programme including braking  

 tests at 1.5 times working load and multiple lowering tests at 1.0 times  

 working load totalling at least 45 m.
7.2 All winches to lower and be capable of holding 1.5 times working load  

 on the winch brake.
Minimum load to overcome winch resistance to measure.
8. RECOVERY OF EMERGENCY BOATS 8.1 Strenght and testing of recovery strops, hanging off pendants and  

 davit structure to be based on working load of mass of lifeboat, equipment  

 and provisions, plus 1000 kg.
Speed of hoisting shall not be less than 0,3  

 m/s.
8.2 Factor of safety of at least 6 based on breaking strenght of strops or  

 pendants.
Factor of safety of at least 4.5 on hanging off pendant attachment.  

 Factor of safety of 4.5 on davit structure when hanging off boat with ship  

 trimmed up to 10 degrees and listed up to 15 degrees either way.
9. TESTS AFTER INSTALLATION ON BOARD SHIP 9.1 Shipboard tests to be to satisfaction of the Participating Authority  

 of the country of registry.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR GLASS FIBRE REINFORCED PLASTIC (G.R.P.) LIFEBOATS (Only SI units are used in the common requirements given in the following  

 pages.
Except for the units of length the table below sets out the  

 corresponding metric and imperial units) Paragraph SI unit Metric unit Imperial unit 3.3 900 g/sqm 900 g/sqm 2.94 oz/sqft 7.2 7,72 MPa 78,6 kp/sqcm 1120 lb/sqin Appendix 1 75 kg 75 kg 165 lb 6 600 g/sqm 600 g/sqm 1,96 oz/sqft Appendix II 600 g/sqm 600 g/sqm 1,96 oz/sqft COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR GLASS FIBRE REINFORCED PLASTIC (G.R.P.) LIFEBOATS In force since 1st July 1973 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
These requirements deal with matters of design and construction of glass  

 reinforced plastic lifeboats.
Reference should be made to SOLAS Chapter III  

 Regulations 5 - 7 for general requirement for lifeboats.
1. CONSTRUCTION 1.1 General In all forms of G.R.P. construction a glass scrim cloth or surfacing  

 tissue or woven cloth shall be applied to the gel coat.
All air must be  

 excluded between the layers.
1.2 Hand lay-up When hand lay-up is employed as a general rule, each layer of glass  

 reinforcement shall be applied and impregnated separately.
In no case,  

 however, shall more than two layers at a time be applied and the scrim cloth  

 or surfacing tissue shall always be applied separately.
 Each layer of reinforcement is to be thoroughly impregnated with resin and  

 consolidated before applying the next layer.
The butts and laps of successive layers shall be well staggered and each  

 mat shall overlap the adjacent mat by at least 25 mm.
The time between  

 successive laminating operations must not exceed the maximum interval  

 recommended by the resin manufacturer.
 Before applying each mat it shall be ensured that the surface is clean and  

 free from dust.
1.3 Spray lay-up Where it is proposed to deposit resin and glass reinforcement by the spray  

 gun method the boat builders shall first apply to the Participating Authority  

 of the importing country for approval.
 The completed lay-up shall be tested for thickness by non-destructive  

 methods, infra-red methods are not to be employed.
 The Participating Authority must be satisfied that the process is such  

 that the correct resin to glass ratio is maintained.
2. COMBUSTIBILITY - SELF-EXTINGUISHING PROPERTIES 2.1 General The Participating Authority shall be satisfied that the materials used in  

 the completed lay-up provide for self-extinguishing properties.
The test  

 method to be used for ensuring that this requirement is complied with may be  

 as at Appendix II or any other equivalent test method.
3. RESINS AND GLASS FIBRE REINFORCEMENTS 3.1 General Resins and glass fibre reinforcements shall be of a type suitable for  

 boatbuilding application and approved by the Participating Authority for use  

 in lifeboat construction.
3.2 Resins Resins shall be suitable for laminates which will be subjected to stress  

 at temperatures within the range +66 degrees C to - 30 degrees C.
Resins  

 shall conform with the requirements of the Participating Authority or British  

 Standard 3532 »Specification for unsaturated polyestor resin systems for  

 low pressure fibre reinforced plastics«, except that the maximum  

 absorption of cast resin, determined by Test Method 502G of BS 2782, must not  

 exceed 16,5 mg.
The Participating Authority may accept equivalent national or  

 international standards.
3.3 Glass fibre reinforcements Glass fibre reinforcements shall be of the low alkali »E« glass  

 type viz. containing less than 1 per cent alkali.
Chopped strand mats shall  

 be used for the main lay-up and shall not exceed a nominal mass per unit area  

 of 900 g/sqm and shall be finished so as to provide good resin to glass  

 adhesion and laminated wet strenght.
Woven cloths, rovings and tapes may at  

 the discretion of the Participating Authority be used for parts of the  

 lifeboat which are considered to be suitable for their application.
 Where woven glass fibre reinforcements are used those shall be supplied in  

 the desired state and finished so as to provide good resin to glass adhesion  

 and laminated wet strength retention.
 Glass fibre reinforcing materials shall conform with the requirements of  

 the following British Standard Specifications, or other national or  

 international standards approved by the Participating Authority.
 BS 3496 - »Glass fibre chopped strand mats for the reinforcement of  

 polyester resin systems«.
BS 3396 - »Woven glass fibre fabrics for plastics reinforcement« Part 1 Loom state fabrics Part 2 Desized fabrics Part 3 Finished fabrics for use with polyester resin systems.
 BS 3691 - »Glass fibre rovings for the reinforcement of resin  

 systems«.
 BS 3749 - »Woven glass fibre rovings fabrics for the reinforcement of  

 polyester resin systems«.
4. LAMINATES Fillers such as pigments may be added, the quantity excluding fire  

 retarding agents must not exceed 10 parts by weight to 100 parts of resin.  

 The fillers used must be as recommended by the resin manufacturers and  

 approved by the Participating Authority.
The glass content of the laminate  

 shall not be less than 25 per cent or greater than 35 per cent by weight, or  

 such higher percentage as may be agreed between the resin manufacturer, the  

 boat-builder and the Participating Authority.
5. INSERTS The Participating Authority may allow wood or metal inserts subject to  

 precautions being taken to prevent penetration of moisture.
6. BUOYANCY 6.1 Buoyancy materials (other than metal air cases) The Participating Authority is to be satisfied regarding water absorption,  

 fire resistance, the gases given off on combustion and the compatability with  

 other materials of construction, as well as regarding the resistance to the  

 following:
6.2 Internal byoyancy The volume of buoyancy required to be fitted to ensure that the boat is  

 inherently buoyant before the addition of buoyancy equal to at least  

 one-tenth the cubic capacity of the boat is to be assessed taking into  

 account the specific gravity of the materials used in the construction of the  

 boat and the specific gravity of the buoyancy material.
 The Participating Authority may accept other methods of assessing the  

 buoyancy provided that the volume so assessed is sufficient to ensure  

 inherant buoyancy before the addition of buoyancy equal to at least one-tenth  

 the cubic capacity of the boat.
7. STANDARDS OF STRENGTH 7.1 General The Participating Authority may define a standard of strength or may  

 accept a method of construction specifying a minimum hull thickness.
7.2 Strength calculation Where a Participating Authority requires strength calculations these shall  

 be submitted by the boatbuilder and shall estimate the stresses which will  

 arise in the gunwale and keel when the lifeboat is fully loaded and suspended  

 by the lifting hooks.
For the purpose of this calculation, the bending moment  

 shall be taken as WL/6 where W is the weight of the fully laden lifeboat  

 including person, stores and equipment, and L is the distance between the  

 lifting hooks.
Stresses should not normally exceed 7,72 MPa.
8. TESTS 8.1 Degree of cure The degree of cure test detailed in Appendix I shall be carried out when  

 required by the Participating Authority.
8.2 Completion The completed prototype boat or other boats as may be decided by the  

 Participating Authority shall be subjected to the following tests as detailed  

 in Appendix I (1 - 6 inclusive) 9. APPROVAL OF FACILITIES FOR MANUFACTURE 9.1 General The Participating Authority shall be satisfied that the premises used for  

 manufacture are suitable and the personnel are properly trained.
9.2 Premises The moulding shop shall be suitably constructed to maintain an appropriate  

 temperature and arrangements shall be provided for controlling humidity at a  

 suitably low level.
Undue draughts from windows and doors shall be avoided  

 and the entry of direct sunlight shall be eliminated in areas where resins  

 are being mixed and used.
9.3 Storage of material Materials used in laminates shall be carefully stored under the conditions  

 recommended by the manufacturers and used as directed within the stated  

 limits.
Resins, catalysts and accelerators shall be stored in a dry, cool  

 place.
In hot climates or during hot weather the use of refrigerated storage  

 may be necessary.
Glass reinforcing materials and fillers shall be stored in  

 a dry place.
9.4 Inspection during manufacture The Participating Authority shall maintain a sufficient and satisfactory  

 process of inspection during manufacture.
Such inspection shall supplement  

 the quality control and inspection provided by the boatbuilder.
APPENDIX I TESTS 1. STRENGTH TEST The prototype of each size and design is to be tested as follows:
The unloaded lifeboat is to be placed on blocks, or suspended from the  

 lifting hooks, and sights adjusted.
It is then to be loaded with weights  

 evenly distributed and representing the full complement of persons at 75 kg  

 per person, the equipment and incrementally overloads of 25 per cent, 50 per  

 cent, 75 per cent and 100 per cent the total mass.
Weights shall be so disposed as to represent the loading of the lifeboat  

 in its service condition, but they need not be placed 305 mm above the seats  

 to represent the centre of gravity of the seated persons.
The weights for the  

 various overloads shall be correspondingly disposed.
For this reason, testing  

 by filling with water is not to be accepted as this method does not give the  

 proper disposition of weight.
If a motor or a mechanically propelled lifeboat is selected for testing,  

 such parts of the machinery as may be considered necessary shall be removed  

 for the tests in order to avoid damage to them.
Weights shall be added to the  

 lifeboat to compensate for the removal of such items.
 Measurement at full load, 25 per cent, 50 per cent, 75 per cent and 100  

 per cent overloads shall be recorded as follows:
For example, for a deflection of the keel or gunwale at 25 per cent  

 overload of say 16 mm the deflection of the keel or gunwale at 100 per cent  

 must not exceed approximately Any permanent deflection as a result of these tests shall be recorded.  

 Such measurements shall be taken after a suitable lapse of time sufficient to  

 permit the G.R.
P. construction to recover to its original form i.e.  

 approximately 18 h.
2. STABILITY AND FREEBOARD An inclining experiment shall be carried out with the lifeboat loaded with  

 weights representing the full complement of seated persons and the equipment,  

 the centre of gravity of the persons being taken at 305 mm above the seats  

 which they occupy.
The minimum standard for transverse metacentric height  

 acceptable for lifeboats of not less than 7,31 m in length in this condition  

 is as follows:
 The GM for lifeboats equal to or greater than 4,9 m and less than 7,31 m  

 shall be to the satisfaction of the Participating Authority.
 The minimum freeboard when loaded shall be not less than 6 per cent of the  

 regulation lenght of the boat and not less than 0,44 D (where D is the  

 depth).
3. ROWING AND MANOEUVRABILITY TESTS If the lifeboat is oar propelled, it is to be tested for rowing and  

 sailing when loaded with the equipment and the full complement of persons,  

 each wearing a life-jacket.
4. SPEED AND MANOEUVRABILITY OF MOTOR AND HAND  

 PROPELLED LIFEBOATS Speed and manoeuvrability tests shall be carried out to the satisfaction  

 of the Participating Authority.
5. WATERTIGHTNESS TEST The prototype lifeboat is to be complety watertight after floating in the  

 full loaded condition for at least 2 h.
6. DEGREE OF CURE Before the boatbuilder builds his first G.R.P. lifeboat he may be required  

 to prepare a sample lay-up for assessment of degree of cure by an authority  

 acceptable to the Participating Authority.
This sample lay-up shall be flat,  

 305 mm square and made with three 600 g/sqm (or equivalent) chopped strand  

 mats: the chopped strand mats, the resin mix, the resin/glass ratio, gel coat  

 and the curing conditions for this sample lay-up shall be proposed for the  

 lifeboat.
APPENDIX II SELF-EXTINGUISHING LAY-UP The specimen used for this test shall be cut from a sample lay-up made as  

 follows:
 This sample lay-up shall be flat, 305 mm square and made with three 600  

 g/sqm (or equivalent) chopped strand mats; the chopped strand mats, the resin  

 mix, the resin/glass ratio, gel coat and the curing conditions for this  

 sample lay-up shall be as proposed for the lifeboat.
 This self-extinguishing property shall be imparted to the whole of the  

 lay-up including the gel coat: to achieve this, either a self-extinguishing  

 resin acceptable to the Participating Authority as supplied by the resin  

 manufacturer may be used, or fire retarding agents may be added by the  

 boatbuilder to the non-self-extinguishing resin which shall also be of a type  

 acceptable to the Participating Authority.
Three test specimens, each approximately 152 mm long by 13 mm wide shall  

 be used for this test, and shall be tested in a draught free atmosphere.
Each  

 specimen shall be marked by scribing a line 15 mm from one end.
The other end  

 shall be clamped in a support so that the longitudinal axis of the specimen  

 is horizontal and the transverse axis inclined at 45 degrees to the  

 horizontal.
Under the test specimen there shall be clamped a piece of clean  

 wire gauze (18 meshes per 25 mm or linear inch) about 127 mm square in a  

 horizontal position 6 1/2 mm below the edge of the specimen and with about 13  

 mm of the specimen extending beyond the edge of the gauze.
A bunsen burner (1  

 mm minimum outside diameter) with a luminous flame 13 mm to 19 mm in height  

 shall be placed under the free end of the specimen.
At the end of 30 s the  

 bunsen flame shall be removed and the specimen allowed to burn.
If the flame  

 on the specimen is extinguished before reaching the 25 mm mark, the burner  

 shall again be placed under the free end for a second period of 30 s  

 immediately following the extinction of the first flame.
 If the flame is again extinguished before reaching the 25 mm mark on each  

 of the three test specimens, the lay-up from which the specimens have been  

 cut shall be regarded as self-extinguishing.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR INFLATABLE LIFE-RAFTS (Only SI units are used in the common requirements given in the following  

 pages.
Except for the units of length the table below sets out the  

 corresponding metric and imperial units) Paragraph SI unit Metric unit Imperial unit 3.5 96 cubdm 96 cubdm 3.4 cubft 3.6 96 cubdm 96 cubdm 3.4 cubft 3.7 0,372 sqm 0,372 sqm 4 sqft 3.13 10 KN 1020 kp 2250 lbf 5 KN 510 kg 1125 lbf 4.4 8,6 MPa 87,7 kp/sqcm 1250 lbf/sqin 65 N 6,63 kp 14.5 lbf 4.5 12,5 MPa 127,5 kp/sqcm 1800 lbf/sqin 21 MPa 214 kp/sqcm 3025 lbf/sqin  

 4,2 MPa 43 kp/sqcm 605 lbf/sqin 5.5 1 cubdm 1 l 0.22 gal 7.10 75 kg 75 kg 165 lb 7.14 37,8 cubdm/s 37,8 cubdm/s 500 gal/min 7.17 75 kg 75 kg 165 lb 7.18 75 kg 75 kg 165 lb 8.1(a) 0,4 kPa/degC 0,004 kp/sqcm/degC 0.03 lbf/sqin/degF 8.1(b) 0,18 kPa 0,018 kp/sqcm/degC 0.25 lbf/sqin/degF 8.1(c) 0,13 kPa 0,013 kp/sqcm/degC 0.18 lbf/sqin/degF 8.1(f)(ii) 0,35 kPa 356 mm H2O 14 in water gauge 75 Pa 77 mm H2O 3 in  

 water gauge 8.1(f)(iii) 0,25 kPa 255 mm H2O 10 in water gauge 50 Pa 51 mm H2O 2 in  

 water gauge 8.3 75 kg 75 kg 165 lb 9 2,2 kN plus 0,4 kN 225 kp plus 47 kp 500 lbf minus minus plus 103 lbf  

 minus 10.5 plus 14 g plus 14 g plus 0.5 oz minus minus minus 56 g 56 g 2 oz 1,1  

 kg 1,1 kg 2.4 lb 28 g 28 g 1 oz COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR INFLATABLE LIFE-RAFTS In force since 1 July 1973 (Amended September 1976 and September 1984) N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. SAFETY OF LIFE AT SEA (SOLAS) REQUIREMENTS The SOLAS requirements for inflatable life-rafts are specified in Chapter  

 III Regulations 15 and 17.
2. SUBMISSIONS Prototype life-rafts must be constructed in accordance with the plans and  

 specifications submitted and subjected to the tests required in paragraph  

 7.1.
3. CONSTRUCTION 3.1 General The life-raft must be of sufficiently robust construction to remain afloat  

 when fully laden for 30 days under extremes of temperature likely to be  

 encountered at sea anywhere in the world and in all sea conditions, without  

 such deterioration as would involve any loss of seaworthiness.
The life-raft  

 must be so constructed that when inflated and floating with the cover  

 uppermost it will be stable in a seaway.
All material and components used in the construction of a life-raft, its  

 accessories and container must be able to withstand world-wide seagoing  

 climatic conditions as mentioned in the preceding sub-paragraph.
A life-raft  

 and its accessories when stowed in the life-raft container must be resistant  

 to the effect of humidity and all materials, e.g. fabrics, cordage, webbing  

 and thread, must be rot proof or rot proofed by an acceptable method.
 The life-raft assembly must be able to withstand weather deck stowage on  

 board ship with a minimum of protection to the operational valise or  

 container.
3.2. Fabrics The fabrics used in the construction of inflatable life-rafts must be:
All fabrics used in the construction of life-rafts must be manufactured in  

 accordance with the accepted specifications under a supervision acceptable to  

 the Participating Authority of the importing country and be certified  

 accordingly.
For this purpose fabric proofers should obtain »type  

 approval« in respect of the specifications accepted by the Participating  

 Authority.
 The outer surface of the fabrics must be coloured as follows:
 The colours proposed to be used by the life-raft manufacturer must be  

 stated in the specification submitted for approval.
3.3 Cordage, webbing and thread Where these materials are used in the construction of a life-raft or in  

 the make-up of the fittings or equipment they must be specified in sufficient  

 detail.
All cordage must be attached to the life-raft in such a manner that  

 if accidentally detached the buoyancy tubes will not be demaged.
3.4 Seams Full details of the proposed method of joining panels of the fabric of  

 which a life-raft is to be constructed must be submitted to the Participating  

 Authority.
 If an adhesive solution is to be employed a full description including  

 composition, directions for storage, mixing, application and tests to be  

 applied must be given.
3.5 Buoyancy chamber The main buoyancy chambers forming the boundary of the life-raft are to be  

 gas inflated from an automatic gas inflation system as specified in paragraph  

 4.1 and must on inflation provide at least 96 cubdm of volume for each person  

 the life-raft can accomodate.
 This calculation shall be based on the designed diameter of the tube or  

 tubes, no allowance being made for stretch of the fabric.
 In order to provide a safety margin the main buoyancy chambers must be  

 divided into two compartments, each inflated through its own non-return  

 inflation valve and so arranged that in the event of either of these separate  

 compartments being damaged, or failing to inflate, the intact compartment in  

 association with the floor (or part of the floor bounded by the intact  

 compartment) will be able to support out of the water the number of persons  

 which the life-raft is fit to accommodate with sufficient minimum freeboard  

 (see paragraph 7.7).
 Arrangements for accomplishing this which have been accepted are a single  

 buoyancy tube divided into two equal portions by diaphragms or by two  

 separate tubes, one being superimposed upon the other.
Each buoyancy chamber of double tube rafts shall contribute to the total  

 buoyancy required.
The maximum designed volume of either chamber must not  

 exceed 60 per cent of the total volume of the buoyancy chambers.
The arrangements of the bulkheads or diaphragms (where these are  

 necessary) in the buoyancy chamber are to be such that they form a virtual  

 continuation of the boundary fabric of the buoyancy chamber should there be  

 inflation on one side only of the diaphragms.
The deflation of any  

 compartment is not to cause undue loss of pressure in the remaining  

 compartments.
3.6 Arches and thwart The arches or other means for supporting the cover and the main buoyancy  

 chambers must be gas inflated from the automatic inflation system.
In the case of the single buoyancy tube life-raft the tube must be divided  

 by diaphragms and a thwart must be fitted.
The thwart must be:
 Alternative proposals to the inflated thwart will be considered provided  

 they effectively give the same degree of subdivision of the raft.
 Thwarts must not be included in the main buoyancy calculation of 96 cubdm  

 per person.
The thwart, when fitted in conjunction with baffles or diaphragms in the  

 single buoyancy tube design must be fitted with a slack diaphragm subdividing  

 the thwart tube longitudinally.
The diaphragm must be sufficiently slack and  

 free to move across and take up the form of the other half of the thwart tube  

 should the thwart become damaged.
This will necessitate separate inflation of  

 the thwart tube on each side of the diaphragm.
 All remarks regarding material and construction of the buoyancy chamber  

 will apply to these units, and their attachments to the buoyancy tube are to  

 be such as not to impair the pressure tightness of the whole system.
3.7 Floor The floor of any life-raft must be watertight.
Heat and cold insulation  

 from the sea, where such is required, may be by means of one or more  

 compartments which may be inflated at will.
Alternative means of providing  

 insulation will be considered.
An inflatable floor must be constructed of suitable fabric sited at the  

 underside of the main buoynacy chamber with one or more compartments.
Means  

 of deflating each compartment may be combined in the inflation valve or by a  

 separate plug.
 Special attention shall be paid to the attachment of the floor to the  

 buoyancy chamber to ensure that the resulting joint is secure and watertight.
The floor area, measured to the inside of the main buoyancy tube must be  

 at least 0,372 sqm for each person the life-raft can accommodate.
The area  

 occupied by the thwart shall be included in the calculation of the floor  

 area.
 The area occupied by supports for the canopy shall not be included in the  

 calculation of the floor area.
3.8 Water pockets To aid the stability of the raft water pockets, or other equally efficient  

 means, must be fitted to the underside of the floor.
 Tripping lines must not be fitted.
3.9 Weather cover The weather cover must erect automatically on inflation of the raft.
When  

 a double weather cover is required it shall consist of an outer cover and an  

 inner tent with an adequate air space in between.
There shall be small vent  

 holes, or their equivalent, in the inner tent to enable air to enter the gap  

 between it and the outer cover as erection takes place.
It has been found  

 advantageous to fit reeds to maintain the gap between the layers.  

 Alternatively this space may be manually inflatable.
 Other equivalent means of protection will be considered.
 The cover when erect must be capable of withstanding the test detailed in  

 paragraph 7.10.
 The height of the cover shall be such that the occupants can sit  

 comfortably upright on the floor when the raft is waterborne.
In rafts for more than six persons at least two diametrically opposite  

 ventilation openings must be fitted.
In rafts for six or fewer persons one  

 may be allowed.
The ventilation openings shall be fitted with means of  

 closing, these shall be secured open when the raft is packed.
In rafts for more than eight persons two separate entrances into raft must  

 be provided.
When two separate entrances are fitted they must be on opposite  

 sides of the raft.
The entrances must be provided with means for closing.
In rafts fitted  

 with an outer and an inner canopy, the entrance closures must be double and  

 so arranged that the insulating space between the weather cover and inner  

 tent is continued in way of the entrances when they are closed.
Arrangements must be fitted for keeping the entrance covers open and the  

 raft must be packed with the entrance covers in this position.
It must be  

 possible to secure them closed, so as to be weathertight, or in any  

 intermediate position.
3.10 Rain water collector Means must be fitted in double canopy rafts for collecting rain water from  

 the cover and passing it through the cover by a short length of tubing  

 provided with a suitable stopper or other means of controlling the flow.
Rain  

 water can normally be collected in polythene (or similar) bags used in the  

 packing of the emergency packs and the note to this effect should be included  

 in the Instruction Booklet (see paragraph 5.18 (b)(viii)).
3.11 Internal grab-lines Internal grab-lines must be fitted around the inside perimeter of all  

 life-rafts.
These grab-lines must be of webbing of not less than 25 mm width  

 or of a cordage of not less than 25 mm circumference.
3.12 External grab-lines A grab-line must be secured around the outside of the life-raft.
The  

 grab-line must form suitable hand holds for persons in the water, with each  

 loop reaching within 75 mm of the water line in the loaded condition.
 These grab-lines shall be of webbing of not less than 25 mm width or of a  

 cordage of not less than 25 mm circumference.
 The grab-lines shall be suitably arranged for carrying the inflated raft.
3.13 Painters A rot proof painter of required length, not less than 8 mm diameter and of  

 material and/or construction providing grip, shall be attached to the  

 life-rafts.
 The breaking load of the painter system including the attachment to the  

 life-raft must not be less than 10,0 kN for life-rafts carrying nine persons  

 or more and not less than 5,0 kN for life-rafts carrying less than nine  

 persons.
 The breaking load of the knotted painter shall be calculated at 55 per  

 cent of the normal breaking strength of the rope.
3.14 Boarding arrangements Efficient means to enable persons in the water to board the raft must be  

 provided at each entrance to the raft.
The method of testing the efficacy of  

 the arrangements is given at paragraph 7.11. Boarding ramps may be fitted if  

 so desired by the Participating Authority.
3.15 Righting arrangements If the life-raft inflates in an inverted position it must be capable of  

 being readily righted by one man under the conditions detailed in paragraph  

 7.12.
4. INFLATION SYSTEM 4.1 General The inflation system must be capable of satisfying the requirements of the  

 tests detailed in paragraph 7.4.
 The inflation of the life-raft shall take place on the pulling of the line  

 by one man.
 The gas cylinder and operating head must be stowed and secured to the  

 outside of the life-raft.
4.2 Gas Normally CO2 gas shall be used for inflation but any other gas which may  

 be used shall be similarly non-toxic.
It must provide a high rate of  

 inflation but be sufficiently free from icing at the outlet during expansions  

 so that the inflation complies with the requirements of paragraph 7.4.
 The quantity of gas provided must be sufficient to meet the conditions of  

 paragraph 7.4.
4.3 Gas cylinder Cylinders in which the gas is carried must be manufactured to a standard  

 specification acceptable to the Participating Authority and certified by an  

 official organization of the exporting country.
The neck of the cylinder shall be threaded to receive a valve unit.
The  

 function of this unit is to retain the gas in the cylinder and in conjunction  

 with the operating head, to release the gas at the desired moment.
The  

 threads for attachment of the operating head and the high pressure hose shall  

 be provided with protecting caps during transit.
For the maximum rate of inflation CO2 when used shall be discharged in its  

 liquid state.
To ensure this the design of gas passages must be such that no  

 expansion can occur.
A siphoning tube shall be connected to the base of the  

 valve unit inside the cylinder so that the open end is immersed in the liquid  

 when the cylinder is in its operational position.
A safety device must be  

 incorporated to relieve at a pressure below the test pressure of the cylinder  

 and must give positive indication of that occurrence.
 Where carbon dioxide is used its dryness shall be defined for CO2 type 1,  

 in Section 1 of British Standard specification 4105; 1967 - Specifiaction for  

 Liquid CO2 Industrial.
The cylinder must be permanently stamped in accordance with the  

 requirements of the specification appropriate to it.
In order to facilitate  

 check weighing of the gas contents of a cylinder it must be stencilled with  

 details and mass of the gas charge and tare mass in kilograms or pounds.
4.4 Operating head Light alloy cylinders, valves and operating heads will only be acceptable  

 after testing in sea water to the satisfaction of the Participating  

 Authority.
 Where it is proposed to assemble light alloy valves or operating heads on  

 steel cylinders the total assembly of cylinder, valve and operating head  

 shall be subjected to sea water testing over a period of 24 months to the  

 satisfaction of the Participating Authority.
 Light alloy operating heads and light alloy marine valves must be  

 anodized.
 As stated in paragraph 4.1 the inflation of the life-raft shall take place  

 on the pulling of the line by one man.
This will require a mechanism attached to the gas bottle for allowing the  

 gas to be released into the life-raft at the desired moment.
With such an  

 arrangement and a cylinder pressure of 8,6 MPa the valve must fully open with  

 a pull at the gas cylinder not exceeding 65 N and with not more than 200 mm  

 travel.
The release mechanism may be arranged as a detachable operating head  

 screwed on to the valve unit in the neck of the cylinder.
In this case the  

 handing of the thread must be arranged so that when the operating head is  

 fitted to the valve unit there is no tendency to slacken the valve in the  

 cylinder.
Where the operating cable of the type of head described above is attached  

 to the life-raft painter it must ensure that the load is wholly taken by the  

 operating cable until the valve has operated.
When the valve is fully open  

 the full painter load must be transferred to the towing patch or bridle.
The  

 operating cable must be of non-corrodable material.
 There must be positive means of retaining the valve in the open position  

 when it has been operated and an indicator to show whether or not the head  

 has been operated.
The cable from the pulley rim must be protected in a suitable flexible  

 conduit to prevent chafing of the life-raft fabric and to ensure that the  

 cable does not become kinked.
The operating head must be sealed from the  

 entry of water perticularly at the end of the conduit.
 Suitable means of preventing the head chafing the fabric of the life-raft  

 shall be fitted.
4.5 High pressure hose assembly A suitable high pressure hose and manifold is to be provided to convey the  

 gas from the cylinder to the inflatable chambers.
A test pressure of 12,5 MPa must be applied hydrostatically to each  

 complete hose assembly for a minimum duration of 1 min during which any  

 leakage from the hose or end fitting will justify rejection.
After this test  

 each hose must be dried by blowing through with air and checked for length,  

 which shall be within the limit stated on the accepted drawing or  

 specification of the hose.
The hose assembly must be of a type which has a minimum bursting pressure  

 of 21 MPa at normal temperature and 4,2 MPa at minus 45 degrees C.
It must  

 operate satisfactorily over a temperature range of minus 45 degrees C to plus  

 70 degrees C and must be capable of being bent through 180 degrees over a  

 former having a radius of 50 mm at minus 45 degrees C after which it must  

 satisfactorily pass the hydraulic test of 12,5 MPa above.
Suitable end  

 fittings must be provided.
In particular the metal and wall thickness of  

 union nuts must be sufficiently robust to withstand a reasonable degree of  

 over tightening.
Where nipples are inserted at the end of the hose they must  

 be suitably shaped to prevent them ploughing up the lining when assembling.  

 To assist in this operation the outside only of the nipple may be lightly  

 smeared with a suitable rubber solution.
 The final inspection of each assembly must verify that the bore of the  

 hose assembly is clean and free from rubber particles and any foreign matter.  

 For this purpose a smooth close fitting rod having a rounded end or a ball  

 shall be passed through the bore of each hose assembly.
 The maker's name, maker's pat no. and the date of test must be marked on  

 the hose together with the mark of the firm's Inspector.
4.6 Valves Non-return valves must be provided at each point where gas from the  

 inflation system enters an inflatable chamber either from the cylinder or  

 from another inflated chamber.
Each chamber which is inflated directly from the inflation system must be  

 fitted with a safety relief valve and a valve which will allow air to be  

 introduced into each chamber for topping-up the pressure with the hand  

 inflator provided with the accessories.
It is permissible to combine these  

 two functions in one valve.
The safety valve must function so as to allow gas to escape should the  

 pressure exceed that which would be safe for the tubes to carry.
It must  

 reseat at a pressure which will give satisfactory rigidity to the tubes.
 Means of deflation must be fitted as necessary but their number must be  

 kept to the minimum required for deflating the fully inflated raft for  

 re-packing.
Inflation arrangements must be such that in the event of deflation of  

 either one of the buoyancy chambers the canopy will remain substantially  

 erect.
This shall be achieved by non-return valves or other equivalent means.
 Canopy supports inflated by gas via a non-return valve must be provided  

 with a means of topping-up manually.
4.7 Valise or container Each life-raft together with its necessary equipment must be properly  

 packed in a valise or container so designed as to provide maximum protection  

 from the weather and so constructed as to be capable of withstanding hard  

 wear and affording protection to the life-raft and its equipment under all  

 seagoing conditions.
The inside of the valise or container must be smooth so  

 as not to cause any damage to the fabric of the life-raft by chafing.
The valise or container must be so constructed that the life-raft will  

 break free on inflation.
It must be a neat fit for the packed life-raft to  

 prevent chafing of the life-raft fabric.
 The aperture in the container through which the painter runs must be so  

 arranged that the container will free itself from the painter on inflation.
 Suitable means must be provided for carrying the life-raft in its valise  

 or container prior to launching.
5. EQUIPMENT 5.1 Lamps To help a survivor locate a life-raft a lamp must be fitted on top of the  

 cover.
A second lamp must be fitted in the interior of the raft.
The lamps  

 must be wired independently of each other.
Each socket must receive current  

 from its own sea activated cell stowed in a pocket on the underside of the  

 raft.
Each lamp must be watertight and capable of giving an output of  

 approximately 0,3 cd for at least 12 h when connected to the water activated  

 cell which must have an endurance for this period.
The casing of the lamps  

 and cells must be sufficiently robust to withstand the required drop tests on  

 the life-raft without damage to the lamp or life-raft.
Water activated cells must be proof against leakage of chemicals which  

 might damage or cause deterioration of the fabric of the life-raft.
They must  

 be able to function satisfactorily in water of varying salinity and in  

 temperatures varying from freezing point to tropical heat.
The wiring between  

 the cell and the bulb must be adequately protected.
5.2 Emergency packs and containers Every life-raft is to be equipped an Emergency Pack containing the  

 equipment in SOLAS Regulation 17(a) or 17(b) as appropriate.
This equipment  

 must be stowed in a container or containers which will provide protection  

 against damage by penetration of water.
The contents of the containers must  

 be so packed that they will withstand the 18 m drop test without being  

 impaired.
A list of contents must be provided with the container.
The container or  

 containers must be capable of being readily opened.
Items shall be packed in  

 such a manner that those of prior importance are readily accessible, e.g.  

 pyrotechnics.
 The packed container must be secured inside the life-raft and must be  

 buoyant if placed in the water.
 For convenience the packs will be identified according to their contents,  

 i.e.
Packs for life-rafts complying with SOLAS Chapter III Regulation 17(a)  

 will be called PACK A Packs for life-rafts on vessels complying with one-sixth requirement in  

 SOLAS Chapter III Regulation 17(b) will be called PACK B Packs for life-rafts on vessels complying with other than one-sixth  

 requirement SOLAS Chapter III Regulation 17(b) will be called PACK C 5.3 Rescue quoit A buoyant rescue quoit shall be stowed in an accessible position.
This  

 quoit must be attached to 30 m of light buoyant line and must be capable of  

 being thrown 9 m in calm weather.
It must be of sufficient size to enable a  

 person in the water to grasp it firmly.
The inboard end of the line must be  

 attached to the raft.
5.4 Safety knife The knife must be shaped so that it will not damage the fabric of the  

 life-raft if it is accidentally dropped.
An ordinary clasp knife is not  

 accepted.
The blade of the knife must either be flexible or sufficiently  

 rigid to prevent fracture which could cause damage to the life-raft, e.g.  

 during the drop test.
The knife must be stowed on the buoyancy tube near that  

 entrance of the raft which is adjacent to the painter and must be secured to  

 the life-raft by a light line of sufficient length to enable the painter to  

 be readily cut.
Knives shall be supplied as follows:
5.5 Bailer The bailer must be of not less than 1 cubdm capacity.
Sharp edges shall be  

 avoided.
Bailers shall be supplied as follows:
5.6 Sponges Two sponges suitable for mopping up water must be supplied to all rafts.
5.7 Sea anchor (drogue) Two sea anchors must be supplied, these must each be attached to a 9 m  

 line of adequate strength.
At least one shall be stowed in an easily  

 accessible place in the life-raft so that it can be easily streamed when the  

 loaded life-raft is clear of the ship.
The inboard end of the line of this  

 drogue shall be attached to a strong point on the raft.
 A swivel shall be fitted to the sea anchor in order to prevent the line  

 unlaying as a result of rotation.
5.8 Paddles Two paddles or equivalent means of propulsion must be provided in each  

 life-raft.
It must be demonstrated that the paddles proposed are capable of  

 propelling the loaded raft at a speed of at least half a knot in calm weather  

 over a short distance.
The paddles must be stowed in an easily accessible position in such a  

 manner as to protect from damage or from liability to damage the fabric of  

 the life-raft when it is dropped from a height of 18 m into the water.
The  

 most suitable stowage would appear to be on the outside of the emergency  

 pack.
Sharp edges must be avoided.
5.9 Repair kit A repair kit in a suitable container must be provided for repairing  

 punctures in the buoyancy compartments.
It shall consist of various sizes of  

 patches with solution for fixing them.
In addition, at least three plugs of  

 various size must be provided for plugging holes in the buoyancy chamber.  

 Other devices for sealing holes must be at least equivalent in efficiency and  

 full details must be supplied to the Participating Authority for  

 consideration.
5.10 Bellows or pumps An adequate hand operated bellows or pump must be provided for topping-up  

 the pressure as necessary.
The design must be such that it can be easily  

 operated by one man seated in the life-raft.
It must be capable of being  

 quickly attached to the topping-up valves of buoyancy tubes, arched tubes,  

 floor and canopy if the insulating space is inflated.
All sharp edges and  

 features which might damage the fabric of the raft must be avoided in the  

 design.
5.11 Tin openers Three tin openers of an accepted safety type, which will not accidentally  

 cause damage to the fabric of the life-raft, must be provided.
 Some safety knives incorporate a devise for piercing the water containers.  

 Where safety knives of this type are included in the equipment of an  

 inflatable life-raft they may be accepted, not only as safety knives but also  

 in partial fulfilment of the requirements for three safety tin openers.
5.12 First aid outfit When a first aid outfit contains morphine or age prone drugs its container  

 must be clearly and indelibly marked with the appropriate date.
5.13 Whistle A non-metallic whistle capable of emitting a loud blast must be provided  

 for signalling.
5.14 Fishing line A fishing line and hooks when provided must be suitable for sea fishing.
5.15 Desalting kit If a desalting kit is supplied any necessary fixing points shall be fitted  

 to the raft, instructions shall be supplied and any necessary warning notices  

 shall be conspicuously displayed.
5.16 Anti-sea sickness tablets At least six doses of anti-sea sickness tablets of an approved type must  

 be provided for each person the life-raft is fit to accommodate.
They must be  

 stowed in satisfactory containers which must be readily accessible in the  

 Emergency Pack Container.
5.17 Attachments for aerial When required suitable attachments to hold the aerial of an accepted type  

 of portable radio equipment must be so arranged that the aerial can be easily  

 erected and taken down.
The attachments must be positioned so as not to be  

 obstruct the entrances of the life-raft.
The attachments shall be strong  

 enough to hold the aerial in the operating position without damaging the  

 life-raft.
5.18 Instructions to survivors 1. Watch arrangements 2. Survival protection against cold or heat 3. Water and food rationing, collection of rainwater 4. Instructions on »do's« and  

 »don'ts« for survival 6. DAVIT-LAUNCHED LIFE-RAFTS 6.1 Lifting arrangements The lifting strops and their attachment on the buoyancy tubes and to the  

 floor must be so spaced as to ensure that the load is evenly distributed.
The  

 spacing of the lifting strops must be arranged to minimize obstruction to  

 boarding and enable survivors to be comfortably seated inside on the floor of  

 the raft.
 Provision must be made as necessary to reinforce the fabric of the raft to  

 prevent the lifting strop from cutting into it when under load.
The strops must be joined at the top of the form of an eye or connected to  

 a lifting ring or pinned shackle.
The shackle or ring must be designed with a  

 factor of safety of five and be proof tested to 2.5 times the maximum working  

 load it is intended to carry in service.
7. ACCEPTANCE TESTS FOR PROTOTYPE LIFE-RAFTS 7.1 General Each prototype life-raft must undergo successfully to the satisfaction of  

 the Participating Authority the tests detailed in paragraph 7.2 to 7.18.
7.2 Drop test Each type of life-raft shall be subjected to a minimum of two drop tests  

 and at leats one such test is to be carried out with life-raft packed in each  

 type of container or valise in which the manufacturer proposes to pack it.
 The Participating Authority may also require a drop test to be carried out  

 with the life-raft packed with each proposed type of pack in any combination  

 of pack and valise or container which the manufacturer wishes to market.
For this test the life-raft in the operationally packed condition shall be  

 dropped from the appropriate height into water.
The free end of the painter  

 shall be attached to the point of suspension so that it pays out as the raft  

 drops, thus simulating actual conditions.
It shall be left floating for 30  

 min and at the end of this period be inflated by pulling the painter.
The  

 raft shall inflate upright within the accepted time (see paragraph 7.4). It  

 shall then be lifted from the water to permit thorough inspection of the  

 raft, the container or valise and the contents of the emergency pack.
Damage  

 to the container is acceptable provided the Participating Authority adjudges  

 that it would not hazard the raft.
Damage to any item of equipment is  

 acceptable subject to the Participating Authority being satisfied that its  

 operational efficiency has not been impaired; in particular, damage to any  

 tins of water may be accepted by the Participating Authority provided they do  

 not leak.
Rafts which are to be stowed more than 18 m above water must be a  

 type which has been suitably tested.
7.3 Emergency pack buoyancy test An emergency pack shall be capable of floating 30 min without harm to any  

 of its contents.
7.4 Inflation tests A life-raft, operationally packed in each type of container or valise in  

 which the manufacturer wishes to market it, must be inflated by pulling the  

 painter and the time recorded:
 when tested in an ambient temperature of 21 degrees C, at 66 degrees C and  

 at minus 30 degrees C.
When inflated in an ambient temperature of 21 degrees C it must achieve  

 conditions (a), (b) and (c) in not more than 30 s, 90 s and 3 min  

 respectively.
The inflation associated with the drop test may be accepted in  

 place of this test.
For the inflation at 66 degrees C the operationally packed raft in a  

 container or valise which need not be sealed shall be placed in a heating  

 chamber for not less than 7 h.
The first 2 h may be utilized for heating the  

 chamber to 66 degrees C.
After a period of 5 h at the full temperature the  

 raft shall be inflated by pulling the painter.
Under these conditions the gas  

 pressure relief valves must be of sufficient capacity to prevent damage to  

 the raft by over pressure.
Althought it is preferred that the raft be heated  

 in a chamber large enough to permit it being inflated therein, removal from  

 the hot chamber prior to inflation is permitted provided the removal and  

 inflation are carried out promptly.
For the inflation at minus 30 degrees C the operationally packed life-raft  

 shall be placed in a refrigerated chamber at a temperature of minus 30  

 degrees C for a period of 24 h.
Then with the temperature of the chamber  

 maintained at minus 30 degrees C the raft shall be inflated by pulling the  

 painter.
Under these conditions, within 3 min of operating the painter,  

 davit-launched rafts must reach their full working pressure.
Any other raft  

 shall be inflated to such an extent that its buoyancy tubes have assumed  

 their full shape and the canopy is sufficiently erect for the occupants to  

 get under cover.
As a result of this test there shall be no slippage,  

 cracking or other defect in the life-raft and it shall be in all respects  

 ready for use.
Two consecutive successful cold inflation tests are required to be  

 demonstrated on all designs of rafts.
The necessity for tests on modified  

 designs of rafts shall be considered by the Participating Authority.
Other  

 methods of satisfactorily demonstrating a life-raft's capacity of operation  

 in the cold enviroment stipulated in SOLAS may be agreed between the  

 Participating Authorities of the importing and exporting countries.
7.5 Loading and seating test The freeboard or draught of the inflated life-raft in the light condition  

 must be recorded and the raft then loaded with the number of adults it is  

 intended to accomodate.
Each person used in this test must be an adult and  

 must be wearing an approved life-jacket suitable for an adult.
The freeboard  

 of the life-raft when loaded must be recorded.
The Participating Authority  

 must ensure that the intended number of persons has sufficient comfort and  

 headroom and it must be demonstrated to its satisfaction that the various  

 items of equipment can be used within the raft in this condition and the  

 floor inflated.
The minimum freeboard in a fully laden condition, with the  

 raft on an even keel and before inflating the floor, must be not less than  

 305 mm.
7.6 Stability test The full complement of the raft must be crowded to one side and then to  

 one end and in each case the freeboard must be recorded.
Under these  

 conditions the freeboard must be such that there is no danger of the  

 life-raft being swamped.
 The stability of the life-raft during boarding may be ascertained as  

 follows:
Two men each wearing approved life-jackets suitable for an adult should  

 board the empty raft.
It should then be demonstrated that the two persons in  

 the raft can readily assist from the water a third person who is required to  

 feign unconsciousness.
The third person must have his back towards the  

 entrance so that he cannot help himself into the raft.
The Participating  

 Authority is to be satisfied that the water pockets adequately counteract the  

 upsetting moment on the raft.
7.7 Damage test It shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Participating  

 Authority that when the life-raft is fully loaded with number of persons it  

 can accomodate (paragraphs 3.5 and 3.7), with either half of its buoyancy  

 fully deflated, it has sufficient minimum freeboard which must be recorded.  

 The requirements of paragraph 4.6 shall be met.
7.8 Manoeuvrability test It shall be demonstarted that the paddles provided are capable of  

 propelling the raft when fully laden in calm conditions at a speed of at  

 least 0,5 kN over a distance of at least 23 m.
7.9 Towing test It shall be demonstrated that the fully laden life-raft is capable of  

 being satisfactorily towed at 3 kN in calm weather and that the towing gear  

 and painter provide a safety factor of 3.
7.10 Jump test It shall be demonstrated that a person can jump on to the cover of the  

 life-raft from a height of at least 4,5 m without causing damage to the  

 cover.
For this test the person must weigh not less than 75 kg and be wearing  

 hard bottom shoes, the shoes shall have smooth soles and must not have  

 protruding nails.
7.11 Boarding tests The boarding test shall be carried out in a swimming bath by a team of not  

 more than four persons acceptable to the Participating Authority who shall be  

 of mature age and of differing physiques.
Preferably they should not be  

 strong swimmers.
For this test they shall be clothed in shirt and trousers or  

 a boiler suit and shall wear approved life-jackets suitable for an adult.  

 They must each swim about 90 m before reaching the raft to attempt the  

 boarding, dressed as above and wearing the approved life-jackets.
There must  

 be no rest period between the swim and the boarding attempt.
Boarding shall  

 be attempted by each man individually, i.e. with no assistance from other  

 swimmers or persons already in the raft.
The raft shall be in water too deep  

 to permit the men obtaining any assistance from the bottom of the swimming  

 bath.
The arrangements will be considered satisfactory if three of the men  

 board unaided and the fourth boards with the assistance of any one of the  

 others.
7.12 Righting test For this test the raft shall be inverted.
The righting test shall be  

 carried out by the same team of »survivors« similarly clothed and  

 wearing approved life-jackets and after preconditioning as in 7.11. Each man  

 shall attempt to right the raft unaided.
The raft shall be in water too deep  

 to permit the man's obtaining any assistance from the bottom of the bath when  

 mounting the inverted raft.
The righting arrangements will be considered  

 satisfactory if each man rights the raft unaided.
7.13 Swamp test It shall be demonstrated that if the life-raft is fully swamped it is  

 capable of supporting the number of persons which it is intended to  

 accommodate and remain seaworthy.
It shall be demonstrated that the life-raft  

 does not seriously deform in this condition.
Trials may be required to show  

 that the raft does not flex considerably in waves.
7.14 Hose test To ensure the effectiveness of the canopy closures in preventing water  

 entering the raft the efficiency of the closed entrances shall be  

 demonstrated by means of a hose test or by any other equally effective  

 method.
 The requirement for the hose test is that about 37,8 cubdm of water per s  

 be directed at and around the entrances through a 63,5 mm hose from a point  

 3,7 m away and 1,5 m above the level of the buoyancy tubes.
7.15 Buoyancy of hydrostatically released life-rafts To cater for hydrostatically released life-rafts it shall be demonstrated  

 that the raft operationally packed in its container or valise has sufficient  

 inherent buoyancy for setting the inflation system in action by means of the  

 actuating line in the event of the ship sinking.
7.16 Detailed inspection A prototype life-raft, complete in all respects shall be fully inflated in  

 the manufacturer's works and subjected to a detailed inspection to ensure  

 that all the Participating Authority's requirements are fulfilled.
7.17 Davit-launched life-rafts - strength tests The mass to be put in the raft for the above 400 per cent overload test  

 must be the mass of the appropriate emergency pack plus 5 times the mass of  

 the full complement.
The mass of the persons being taken at 75 kg each.
 A life-raft that has been subject to the above required tests must not be  

 used to serve as a life-saving appliance.
7.18 Davit-launched life-raft boarding tests In addition to the test at 7.11, the raft hanging from a launching  

 appliance and bowsed-in to a ship's side, or simulated ship's side, is to be  

 boarded by a number of persons at least equal to its full complement and  

 together equal in mass to its »full complement x 75 kg« without  

 undue distortion of the raft.
For this test the raft is to be bowsed-in to  

 the ship's side in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, boarded,  

 bowsing released, left hanging 5 min and then lowered to water or floor and  

 unloaded.
At least three tests are required, i.e. with hook of the lowering  

 appliance so positioned that its distance from the ship's side is:
 The boarding is to simulate actual ship-board conditions and is to be  

 timed.
7.19 Additional special tests In addition to the above tests the Paticipating Authority may require  

 special tests for life-rafts of large size, unusual design or new or unusual  

 fabrics.
8. INSPECTION DURING MANUFACTURE A condition of acceptance is that at every stage of manufacture of  

 matrials and components and construction, packing and testing of the  

 life-raft must be effected and certified under the supervision of a Quality  

 Control Organization acceptable to the Participating Authority.
A certificate  

 cannot, therefore, be valid unless the Participating Authority is satisfied  

 with the inspection facilities and information.
 A certificate of inspection must be signed by the manufacturer's Chief  

 Inspector or his approved signatory that each life-raft, on completion,  

 complies fully with the drawings and specifications which have been accepted  

 by the Participating Authority.
When it is desired to make modifications to the accepted design full  

 details of modification must be submitted to the Participating Authority for  

 acceptance.
When modifications have been accepted by the Participating  

 Authority, appropriate alterations or additions to the drawings shall be made  

 and the issue number of the altered documents amended accordingly.
 It will be necessary for the manufacturer seeking his Participating  

 Authority's acceptance for the first time to possess or apply for the  

 Participating Authority's approval of the inspection organization at his  

 factory.
 The inspection of the life-rafts during manufacture must include the  

 following inflation tests:
8.1 Inflation air test The temperature correction in (i) and (iii) shall be calculated and  

 limited as described in paragraph 8.1 (a) above.
In no case must the floor  

 have suffered physical damage, e.g. failure of reed adhesion.
8.2 Operational inflation test The Inspection shall, at its discretion, select a completed and  

 operationally packed raft at random and carry out an operational inflation  

 test on a smooth dry floor or on water, e.g. a swimming pool, as a check on  

 the packing and inflation.
the actual distribution of life-rafts inflated during a period is left to  

 the Inspection's discretion so as to achieve an adequate sampling of the  

 entire production.
It must be observed that undue effort is not required to  

 secure inflation and that the time of inflation is normal.
8.3 Davit-launched life-rafts Every new life-raft must satisfactorily undergo a 10 per cent overload  

 test in accordance with the approved drawings and/or construction  

 specification before the final inflation pressure test required by paragraph  

 8.1 (a) above.
The conditions of the 10 per cent overload suspension test  

 are:
9. HYDROSTATIC RELEASE GEAR Hydrostatic release gear may be fitted into the holding down arrangements  

 of life-rafts on board ship.
When fitted it is desirable to secure the  

 shipboard and of the painter to the release gear.
That part of the  

 hydrostatic release gear which forms part of the painter system of the raft  

 shall be at least equal to the strength of the painter system fitted.
See  

 paragraph 3.13.
A weak link shall be fitted into the system to ensure that a raft which  

 has been released hydrostatically and inflated is not dragged under by the  

 sinking ship.
This weak link system should be of sufficient strength to pull  

 the painter from the raft container and operate its inflation mechanism.
It  

 shall break at a force of 2,2 kN plus minus 0,4 kN.
The operating handle must be secured to the satisfaction of a surveyor  

 once the gear is fitted to prevent accidental operation.
A senhouse slip and  

 a cordage lashing must be fitted in the gripling system.
 The gear is to operate under the following heads of water: from 1,5 m to  

 3,7 m.
 The gear shall be such or of such material that it is not likely to fail  

 due to corrosion.
10. SERVICING 10.1 Servicing manual Manufactures of life-rafts must prepare a manual giving detailed  

 instruction on the opening-up, inspection, testing, repairing and repacking  

 of each of their types of life-raft.
This manual, in draft form, shall be  

 submitted to the Participating Authority for agreement and when agreed,  

 sufficient copies shall be supplied to the Participating Authority for  

 distribution to the Marine Survey Offices from which surveyors normally visit  

 Service Stations.
A copy of the manual shall be supplied to each of the  

 manufacturer's Service Stations.
10.2 Servicing premises Servicing premises shall be provided with the proper equipment, spares and  

 facilities for carrying out the necessary testing and repairs.
In particular  

 the place where servicing is carried out must be clean, free from dust,  

 draughts and strong sunlight and such that an even temperature can be  

 maintained.
It is to be noted when carrying out pressure tests that if there  

 is a temperature variation of more than 30 degrees C during the test period  

 the test is invalid and must be repeated.
The floor must be smooth and kept  

 free from oil, grease and abrasive materials.
The place used for storing the  

 gas cylinders must provide protection of the cylinders against corrosion.
10.3 Qualifications of service personnel Any person employed servicing life-rafts shall be in posession of a  

 certificate issued by the manufacturers of the rafts on which he is employed  

 to the effect that he has attended a course of instruction at their works and  

 is competent to service rafts manufactured by them.
Alternatively the  

 certificates may be issued by a person accredited by the manufacturers to  

 train personnel in servicing and issue the certificates.
10.4 Approval of repair materials All materials, such as fabric, solution, sewing thread used for repairs  

 and also replacement valves, fittings and items in emergency packs shall be  

 of types approved by the manufacturers for the particular purpose.
10.5 Control of gas cylinders All gas cylinders shall be weighed and checked against the gross mass  

 which has been marked on the bottle.
To allow for difference of scales when  

 check-weighing a tolerance of plus minus 14 g is permitted.
If the check-weighing of the total gas content indicates a deficiency  

 greater than 56 g in bottles of nominel gas capacity greater than 1,1 kg or  

 deficiency of 28 g for other bottles, the matter shall be reported to the  

 Participating Authority and the cylinder returned to the life-raft  

 manufacturer for investigation.
In such cases the position of the indicator  

 disc in the operating head shall be noted and reported.
When the operating head is moved from the gas cylinder, protective caps  

 must be fitted on the cylinders.
These caps must not be in place when the  

 cylinder is weighed.
If on any occasion that a cylinder is discharged, and  

 four years have elapsed since the dates when it was last hydraulically  

 re-tested, it shall be subject to a repeat of the test laid down in the  

 approved specification to which it was manufactured.
In any case irrespective  

 of whether the cylinder has been discharged, it shall be returned for testing  

 after approximately ten years have elapsed since the last hydraulic test, or  

 where external wastage due to corrosion is apparent.
10.6 Examination of emergency pack The emergency pack must be examined and its contents renewed as required.
10.7 Repacking rafts after servicing Before folding and repacking rafts care must be taken to ensure that all  

 deflation plugs have been replaced, that plugs placed in relief valves have  

 been removed, and that the inflation cylinder is properly connected up and  

 the operating cord is correctly placed so that the operating cable has a  

 clear lead.
In rafts with two inflation gas cylinders, the cylinders must be  

 properly placed so that the pull from the operating cords will come evenly on  

 the two cylinders.
Guidance on repacking in the maker's manual must be  

 followed.
11. MARKING All markings of life-rafts and valises or containers shall be clearly and  

 indelibly marked.
The marking material must not contain ingredients harmful  

 to adjacent material.
Details of the markings are to be submitted to the  

 Participating Authority for agreement.
The markings shall be in the language  

 or languages stipulated by the Participating Authority.
 The valise or container shall be so marked with the following marks that  

 they are clearly visible when the life-raft is stowed:
MAKER'S NAME or TRADE MARK SERIAL NO TYPE APPROVED BY FOR PERSONS SOLAS or NON SOLAS EMERGENCY PACK TYPE LAST SERVICED NAME AND PLACE OF SERVICE STATION LENGTH OF PAINTER MAXIMUM PERMITTED HEIGHT OF STOWAGE ABOVE WATERLINE (depending on  

 drop-test height and length of painter) and when appropriate - FITTED FOR AREAL.
The postiton of the operating  

 line and instructions for launching shall be clearly marked.
 The life-raft must be marked with:
MAKER'S NAME or TRADE MARK SERIAL NO DATE OF MANUFACTURE - month and year, e.g. 12/70 TYPE APPROVED BY FOR PERSONS In addition the position and use of items of equipment which are stowed  

 outside the emergency pack or packs, e.g. valves, deflate plugs, knives and  

 aerial fittings shall be clearly marked.
12. DESCRIPTIVE MATERIAL For the instruction of officers and crew of ships on which life-rafts are  

 carried, manufacturers shall provide with the life-rafts descriptive posters  

 showing the method of launching and boarding and any necessary precautions to  

 be taken.
There shall be sufficient posters to display one at each  

 embarkation position for rafts which are served by life-raft launching  

 appliances and at each stowage position of other rafts.
In addition, at least  

 two booklets must be provided giving a full detailed description of the  

 life-raft and the manner in which it is to be launched and used.
The  

 publications shall be in the language or languages stipulated by the  

 Participating Authority.
Draft copies of posters and booklets shall be  

 submitted to the Participating Authority for agreement before issue.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR LIFEBOAT COVERS (CANOPIES) (Only SI units are used in the common requirements given in the following  

 pages.
Except for the units of length the table below sets out the  

 corresponding metric and imperial units) Paragraph SI unit Metric unit Imperial unit 1.3 70 kg 70 kg 104 lb COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR LIFEBOAT COVERS (CANOPIES) In force since 1st May 1974 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. MATERIALS 1.1 General requirements Materials used in both covers and supports shall be of moderate weight and  

 the pieces shall easily be erected and folded.
Permanently erected supports  

 are not acceptable.
The cover shall be adequately supported.
1.2 Cover The material in the cover shall be of approved quality.
The cover shall be  

 non-transparent and the colour shall be non bleaching, the outside orange and  

 the inside of a neutral shade.
The outside may be fluorescent.
The material shall be rot and mouldproof and shall have resistance against  

 chafing.
It shall withstand exposure to salt water and diesel oil.
 The weight of the material shall be about 400 g/sqm.
 The material shall withstand storage in temperatures between plus 60  

 degrees C and minus 30 degrees C.
1.3 Supports (arches) of covers The supports (arches, hoops) shall be made of non-corrosive material.
In  

 metal boats the material in the supports shall be the same as that of the  

 boat.
The supports shall have a diameter of at least 20 mm or a bending  

 resistance of 70 kg on the top, whichever figure is the more severe  

 requirement for the material in question.
2. CONSTRUCTION 2.1 The cover shall extend at least 2/3 but no more than 3/4 of the length  

 of the boat, measured from forward and shall be left open at the after end.  

 This opening may however be covered with a loose cross flap.
 2.2 The cover shall be high enough to permit a person to sit properly on  

 the foremost thwart.
2.3 The cover and its fittings shall be designed in a way that it can  

 easily and adequately be made fast to the boat by an unskilled person.
The  

 cover shall provide a substantial overlap over the gunwale, but shall not  

 hamper rowing.
It must be possible to attach a sea anchor at the forward end.
3. SPECIAL MARKINGS The cover shall be fitted with approved retro-reflective tapes of a size  

 of 50 mm x 300 mm shaped in the form of a cross and spaced at suitable  

 intervals (approximately 500 mm).
4. APPROVAL Each cover shall properly fit the boat in which it is intended to be  

 carried.
Materials and construction to be approved by the competent  

 authority, who should provide a stamp on the cover for that purpose.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS (Only SI units are used in the common requirements given in the following  

 pages.
Except for the units of length the table below sets out the  

 corresponding metric and imperial units) Paragraph SI unit Metric unit Imperial unit 2.3 136 cubdm 136 cubdm 4,82 cubft 2.4 2,0 MPa 20,4 kp/sqcm 290 lbf/sqin 2.5 2,5 MPa 25,5 kp/sqcm 363 lbf/sqin 3.2 13,0 MPa 133 kp/sqcm 1886 lbf/sqin 16 kg 16 kg 35,2 lb 45 kg 45 kg 99  

 lb 3.4 16 kg 16 kg 35,2 lb 45 kg 45 kg 99 lb COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS In force since 1st March 1975 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. GENERAL 1.1 Fire extinguishers shall be of types and designs approved by the  

 Participating Authority of the importing country.
They shall be clearly  

 marked with instructions for use and the nature of their contents.
 1.2 Fire extinguishers containing an extinguishing medium which either  

 itself or when in use gives off gases harmful to persons shall not be  

 permitted.
2. FOAM FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 2.1 These common requirements apply to extinguishers using a foam (froth)  

 with an expansion ratio not exceeding 12 to 1.
 2.2 Foam fire extinguishers shall be so designed and constructed that the  

 interior of the extinguisher can be examined.
 2.3 Every foam fire extinguisher shall be provided with a discharge hose  

 together with a nozzle the area of which shall be such that when the  

 extinguisher is operated the foam is projected a horizontal distance of at  

 least 8 m for a period of not less than 100 s in the case of an extinguisher  

 of 136 cubdm capacity or over a horizontal distance of at least 6 m for a  

 period of not less than 90 s in the case of an extinguisher of under 136  

 cubdm capacity.
 2.4 The charge and the air space above the level of the solution in the  

 body of a foam fire extinguisher shall be so regulated that the maximum  

 pressure in the extinguisher when put into action, with all outlets closed  

 does not exceed 2,0 MPa with the solution at a temperature of 40 degrees C.
 2.5 Foam fire extinguishers shall be capable of withstanding for a period  

 of 5 min an internal pressure of 1,5 times the pressure in the extinguisher  

 when put into action with the outlets closed and in no event of less than 2,5  

 MPa.
3. CARBON DIOXIDE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 3.1 Carbon dioxide fire extinguisher cylinders shall be provided with an  

 internal discharge tube securely fixed to the stop valve or operating head.
3.2 Carbon dioxide fire extinguishers shall be provided with a discharge  

 hose which shall withstand a pressure of at least 13,0 MPa when the necessary  

 couplings are fitted.
The bore of the discharge hose shall not be less than  

 the following sizes:
Capacity of exinguisher Minimum bore of discharge hose 16 kg 9,5 mm 45 kg  

 12,5 mm 3.3 The discharge hose shall be provided with a horn which shall be of  

 electrically non-conducting material and of a design which will reduce the  

 velocity of the gas discharge.
The metal part of the operating handle shall  

 be suitably sheathed to protect the hands of the operator from extreme cold.
 3.4 Carbon dioxide fire extinguishers shall, at temperatures between 15  

 degrees C and 18 degrees C, discharge gas at such a rate that carbon dioxide  

 equal in weight to three-quarters of the capacity of the container wil be  

 discharged in the following periods:
Capacity of extinguisher Period 16 kg 30 to 45 s 45 kg 60 to 90 s 4. NON-PRESSURIZED DRY POWDER EXTINGUISHERS 4.1 Non-pressurized dry powder extinguishers shall be of a type for which  

 the driving medium is stored in a separate bottle permanently connected to  

 the extinguisher.
 4.2 The body of the extinguisher shall withstand during 5 minutes an  

 internal pressure suitably in excess of the maximum working pressure at a  

 temperature of 20 degrees C plus minus 2 degrees C obtained in case the  

 driving medium is discharged while the outlet is closed; the test pressure  

 shall be not less than 2,5 MPa.
 The body may be provided with a safety device discharging at a pressure of  

 90 per cent of the test pressure.
 4.3 It shall be possible to inspect the body internally.
 4.4 Non-pressurized dry powder extinguishers shall be provided with a hose  

 for discharging the extinguishing medium.
 The hose shall withstand the internal pressure mentioned in 4.2 and be  

 unkinkable.
 The length of the hose shall be such that the powder can be maintained in  

 a fluid state during sustained and intermittent discharge but in any case not  

 less than 5 and not more than 10 metres.
 At the end of the hose a suitable squeeze grip nozzle shall be provided in  

 order to permit interrupted application of the extinguishing medium.
 The discharge hose shall comply with the following dimensions:
Capacity of extinguisher Minimum bore 25 kg 15,9 mm 50 kg 19 mm 4.5 The bottle containing the driving medium shall withstand a pressure  

 suitably in excess of its maximum working pressure and may be provided with a  

 safety devise discharging at a pressure of 90 per cent of the test pressure  

 of this bottle.
 The following particulars shall be stamped into the bottle; driving  

 medium, volume in cubdm, contents of the medium in kg or pressure of same in  

 MPa, date of pressure testing, test pressure, name of the testing authority,  

 manufacturer's name.
 4.6 Non-pressurized dry powder extinguishers shall at temperatures between  

 15 degrees C and 20 degrees C discharge dry powder at such a rate that 85 per  

 cent of the capacity of the extinguisher will be discharged in the following  

 periods and with the ranges mentioned:
Capacity of extinguisher Minimum discharge Range of throw 25 kg 20-35 sec.  

 10 - 6 m 50 kg 30-50 sec. 10 - 8 m 4.7 Where applicable a cold resistance test may be required.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPASSES The common requirements which have been adopted for compasses are  

 identical with the part of the ISO standard No. 2269 »Magnetic compasses  

 and accessories -Rules for testing and certification« dealing with  

 compasses of class A.
 The ISO standard can be obtained from national standards institutions or  

 from the International Organization for Standardization, Sales Department, 1  

 rue de Varembe, 1211 Geneva 20.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR PILOT HOISTS PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (Only SI units are used in the common requirements given in the following  

 pages.
Except for the units of length the table below sets out the  

 corresponding metric and imperial units) Paragraph Si unit Metric unit Imperial unit 1.2 150 kg 150 kg 331 lb COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR PILOT HOISTS PERFORMANCE STANDARDS In force since 1st May 1976 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authory if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. GENERAL 1.1 Mechanical pilot hoists and ancillery equipment shall be of such  

 design and construction as to ensure that the pilot can be embarked and  

 disembarked in a safe manner.
 1.2 The working load shall be the sum of the weight of the ladder and  

 falls in the fully lowered condition and the maximum number of persons which  

 the hoist is designed to carry, the mass of each person being taken as 150  

 kg.
 1.3 Every pilot hoist shall be of such construction that when operating  

 under the defined working load each component shall have an adequate factor  

 of safety having regard to the material used, the method of construction and  

 the nature of its duty.
 1.4 In selecting the materials of construction, due regard shall be paid  

 to the conditions under which the hoist will be required to operate.
 1.5 The operator shall be able to control the hoist when he is in a  

 standing position and looking over the ship's side for observing the hoist,  

 even in its lowest position.
 1.6 The manufacturer of the pilot hoist shall supply with each  

 installation an approved maintenance manuel, together with a maintenance log.
2. CONSTRUCTION 2.1 The hoist shall generally consist of the following three main parts,  

 but hoists of other equally efficient constructions may be considered:
 2.2 (a) The design of the winch shall include a brake or other equally  

 effective arrangement such as a properly constructed worm drive, which is  

 capable of supporting the working load in the event of power failure.
 2.3 (a) Two separate wire rope falls shall be used, made of flexible steel  

 of adequate strength and resistent to corrosion in a salt-laden atmosphere.
 2.4 The ladder section shall comprise a rigid and a flexible part,  

 complying with the following requirements:
3. TESTING 3.1 Every new pilot hoist shall be subjected to an overload test of 2,2  

 times the working load.
During this test the load shall be lowered a distance  

 of not less than 5,0 m.
 3.2 An operating test of 10 per cent overload shall be carried out after  

 installation on board the ship to check the attachment and performance of the  

 hoist to the satisfaction of the Participating Authority.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR THE APPROVAL AND TESTING OF SELF-CONTAINED BREATHING APPARATUS FOR THE USE OF FIREMEN IN SHIPS ACCORDING TO REGULATION 63 OF CHAPTER 2 IN SOLAS 1960 (Only SI units are used in the common requirments given in the following  

 pages.
The table below sets out the corresponding metric and imperial units) Paragraph Si unit Metric unit Imperial unit 2.4 18,0 kg 18,0 kg 39,6 lb 3.2 85 cubdm 85 cubdm 3 cubft 0,25 kPa 25 mm water gauge 1 in water gauge 3.3 115 cubdm 115 cubdm 4 cub.ft 0,50 kPa 50 mm water gauge 2 in water  

 gauge 3.5 1200 cubdm 1,2 cubmm 42,4 cubft 4.4(a) 25 kg 25 kg 55 lb 4.4(b) 1,0 kPa 100 mm water gauge 3,9 in water gauge 4.5 85 cubdm 85 cubdm 3 cubft 0,25 kPa 25 mm water gauge 1 in water gauge  

 115 cubdm 115 cubdm 4 cubft 0,50 kPa 50 mm water gauge 2 in water gauge 4.6 0,98 kN 102 kp 225 lbf COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR THE APPROVAL AND TESTING OF SELF-CONTAINED BREATHING APPARATUS FOR THE USE OF FIREMEN IN SHIPS ACCORDING TO CHAPTER II/2 IN SOLAS In force since 15 June 1976 (amended 21 September 1976 and 5 May 1977) N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. DEFINITIONS Self-contained breathing apparatus is defined as a compressed fresh-air  

 cylinder and associated apparatus to be carried by a person to allow him to  

 breathe in a contaminated atmosphere.
2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 2.1 Self-contained breathing apparatus shall be of the open circuit  

 compressed air type in which compressed air is fed through a demand valve and  

 breathing tube to the face-mask and in which exhaled air passes through a  

 non-return valve to the atmosphere.
 2.2 The apparatus must effectively be capable of protecting the user  

 during a stay in an atmosphere polluted by smoke, dust, fog, gases and/or  

 vapours and/or where there is a deficit of oxygen.
 2.3 All materials shall be resistent to corrosion in a marine atmosphere.  

 Such materials shall be fire resistant, as far as practicable, and shall be  

 resistant to frictional sparking.
 2.4 The mass of the apparatus fully charged shall be as low as possible  

 and not exceed 18,0 kg. 2.5 The face-mask shall fulfil the following:
 2.6 Cylinders for compressed air shall be marked with the test pressure,  

 the last date of pressure testing, the capacity and be clearly marked to  

 indicate that they contain compressed fresh air.
 2.7 The apparatus shall be clearly and durably marked with the type, name  

 of manufacturer or trade mark.
 2.8 The manufacturer's instruction for use and maintenance shall be  

 supplied with each apparatus.
3. EQUIPMENT OF SELF-CONTAINING BREATHING APPARATUS 3.1 The equipment of a self-containing breathing apparatus shall include  

 the following:
 3.2 The exhalation valve shall be manufactured so that the resistance in  

 the valve by constant flow of 85 cubdm air per min does not exceed 0,25 kPa,  

 or as required by the importing Participating Authority.
3.3 The demand valve shall be manufactured so that the air-admission to  

 the face-mask is sufficient under suitable pressure and so that it ensures a  

 minimum of inconvenience for the user.
The vacuum in direction of inhalation  

 must be constant flow of 115 cubdm air per min not exceed 0,50 kPa or as  

 required by the importing Participating Authority.
3.4 The airline shall be flexible and pliable.
It must not restrain the  

 movement of the head or block the air flow.
 3.5 The storage capacity of the compressed air cylinder or cylinders  

 attached to the apparatus and carried by the wearer shall be at least 1200  

 cubdm of free air.
 3.6 The manometer shall be connected to the cylinder or cylinders by an  

 airline, the length of which shall allow the user to read the dial without  

 taking off the apparatus.
 3.7 The apparatus shall provide a suitable warning to the wearer that  

 indicates when the cylinder pressure drops to a determined level.
 3.8 The carrying arrangement for the equipment shall be of durable  

 construction, of minimal restraint for the user and shall be adjustable.
4. REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING 4.1 The apparatus shall be type-tested by carrying out the tests specified  

 below, or as required by the importing Participating Authority.
 4.2 The test shall be carried out by an institution approved by the  

 Participating Authority concerned.
 4.3 The specimens to be tested shall be representative for the production.
 4.4 The test for face-mask tightness shall be carried out on three  

 specimens as stated below:
 4.5 Measuring and control of breath resistance shall be carried out on  

 three specimens as follows:
The exhalation valve in the self-contained breathing face-mask shall be  

 tested during constant airflow of 85 cubdm per min.
The resistance in the  

 valve must not exceed 0,25 kPa.
The demand valve shall be tested during  

 constant airflow of 115 cubdm per min in inhalation direction and the vacuum  

 in the face-mask must not exceed 0,50 kPa.
 4.6 A mechanical strength test shall be carried out on one specimen by  

 exposing the belt with the coupling arrangement to a pull of 0,98 kN.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR TOTALLY ENCLOSED LIFEBOATS In force since 20th November 1976 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
GENERAL These requirements cover all totally enclosed lifeboats.
Part A is  

 applicable to all such boats; Part B indicates the additional requirements  

 necessary for those boats which are to be classed as »FIRE  

 PROTECTED« lifeboats.
PART A (All totally enclosed lifeboats) All totally enclosed lifeboats shall comply with the requirements for  

 lifeboats contained in SOLAS Chapter III Regulations 5 -7 and when  

 constructed of G.R.P. shall also comply with the Common Requirements for  

 G.R.P. lifeboats.
1. CANOPY The canopy shall be capable of being fully closed watertight and shall be  

 of sufficient strength to support the weight of the fully loaded boat  

 floating in the capasized condition without distortion.
The canopy shall also  

 be capable of withstanding the effect of one person jumping from a height of  

 2 m.
2. ACCESS Access opening shall be arranged so as to ensure easy embarkation and  

 disembarkation.
Means for operating the doors or hatches to such openings  

 shall be available on both the inside and outside of the lifeboat.
Handles  

 shall be provided on each side.
3. OBSERVATION The canopy shall be fitted with observation windows for the use of the  

 helmsman.
4. VENTILATION 4.1 Natural vemtilation shall be arranged, the ventilators being of  

 adequate size to provide sufficient fresh air for the occupants and  

 combustion air for the engine in all weather conditions when all doors,  

 hatches and observation ports are closed.
 4.2 The ventilators shall close automatically in the event of the boat  

 capsizing; provision shall be made to close the ventilators manually from  

 inside the boat.
5. LIGHTING Artificial and natural lighting shall be available in the lifeboat.
6. GENERAL ARRANGEMENT 6.1 The canopy, working decks and canopy openings shall be arranged to  

 facilitate boarding and rescue work at sea.
 6.2 The arrangement shall permit a person to be lifted from the boat by  

 helicopter.
 6.3 Working decks shall have non-skid surfaces.
7. STABILITY 7.1 The stability in the upright condition shall be as indicated in the  

 Common Requirements for G.R.P. lifeboats.
 7.2 In the event of capasizing the boat shall be capable of being righted  

 from the inside by the persons in the boat.
 7.3 The righting characteristics shall be confirmed by a righting test  

 carried out as indicated in Appendix 1.
8. SEAT BELTS Seat belts shall be fitted to secure occupants at the seating positions.  

 The belts shall be effective at all angles of heel including the capsized  

 position.
9. STEERING 9.1 The steering position shall be adjacent to an observation window.
 9.2 Provision shall be made for emergency steering.
 9.3 The boat's compass shall be permanently mounted at the steering  

 position.
10. LOWERING ARRANGEMENTS 10.1 An acceptable type of disengaging gear shall be fitted operable by  

 those inside the canopy under closed down conditions.
 10.2 It shall be possible to release the boat from the falls or blocks at  

 the hook positions.
11. PROPULSION The boat shall be fitted with an engine and shall be capable of going  

 ahead in smooth water at the specified speed when loaded with its full  

 complement.
12. MACHINERY INSTALLATION 12.1 The engine shall comply with the Common Requirements for lifeboat  

 engines.
12.2 Unless the engine is automatically stopped during capsize, the  

 engine, fuel and engine exhaust systems shall be such that in the event of  

 capsize the engine will continue to function during capsizing and following  

 the subsequent righting of the boat.
If the engine is watercooled an engine  

 driven pump shall be capable of running on no load with the lifeboat out of  

 the water for a period of at least 5 min without overheating or other damage.  

 Sea water pumps associated with the engine shall be self priming.
An indirect  

 cooling system shall be capable of being protected against temperatures of  

 minus 50 degrees C, e.g. by suitable antifreeze additive.
12.3 Engine and gearbox dipsticks and lubricating oil filler caps shall be  

 oil tight and arrangements shall be provided to prevent the loss of oil  

 through crankcase breather pipes to enable the engine to run inverted.
A  

 sample engine shall be subjected to the tests detailed in Appendix 2.
12.4 Means shall be provided for preventing sea water entering the exhaust  

 pipe and to prevent air locks forming in the fuel system.
The fuel tank  

 ventilating arrangements must not allow the escape of oil when the tank is  

 inverted.
 12.5 To demonstrate that the fuel and exhaust arrangements will enable the  

 engine to run during and following a capasize an inversion test on the  

 lifeboat with the engine running shall be conducted, unless the engine is  

 automatically stopped during capsize, which shall be demonstrated.
 12.6 The propulsion machinery shall be so arranged that it is possible to  

 start the engine and to control the engine output and direction of thrust of  

 the propeller, from the helmsman's position.
12.7 If electric accumulator batteries are fitted they shall be of a type  

 that will not allow the electrolyte to leak during capsizing.
Where charging  

 of batteries in situ from the ship's main source of power is employed the  

 charging arrangements must not interfere with the launching of the lifeboat  

 and the electrical supply into the boat shall be not more than 55 volts.
The  

 batteries shall be suitably ventilated.
 12.8 Instructions shall be provided at the helmsman's position indicating  

 the main and emergency means of starting and controlling the engine and the  

 use of the emergency tiller.
PART B (Additional requirements for fire protected lifeboats) Fire protected lifeboats shall be capable of safely convening the full  

 complement through a fire on the surface of the water for a period of at  

 least 5 min at the specified speed with the boat under full control.
13. FIRE TEST Prototype fire protected lifeboats shall be subjected to fire tests as  

 considered necessary by the Participating Authority of the importing country.  

 Details of the tests required are at Appendix 3.
14. SPEED The lifeboat shall be capable of going ahead in smooth water at a speed of  

 at least 6 knots when loaded with its full complement of persons and  

 equipment.
Where an engine driven spray pump is fitted it shall be operating  

 at full output at the time of the speed trial.
15. AIR SUPPLY 15.1 Sufficient air shall be provided internally for the life support of  

 the full complement, combustion air for the engine at full power and also to  

 ensure that a positive pressure is maintained within the canopy for a period  

 of at least 10 min.
 15.2 The air shall be distributed within the lifeboat so as to be  

 available to all the occupants.
15.3 Closed canopy tests shall be conducted on prototype boats prior to  

 the fire test required under point 13 with the engine running at full speed  

 to ensure that a positive air pressure is obtained within the canopy and to  

 ascertain the duration of the air supply taking into account the full  

 complement.
Production boats shall be tested for air tightness.
 15.4 Air cylinders shall be made to a specification acceptable to the  

 Participating Authority of the importing country and shall be provided with a  

 pressure gauge to permit a check on the contents without the loss of air.
16. WATER SPRAY 16.1 Where a water spray systems is fitted to protect the lifeboat  

 externally in a fire the sea water pumps shall be self priming and associated  

 pipe work shall be of copper or an equivalent material.
Any spray system  

 shall be capable of operating for at least the same period of time and  

 simultaneously with the air supply for engine and occupants (see point 15.1).
 16.2 When an air driven spray system is fitted means shall be provided for  

 periodic testing of the system without depleting or contaminating the air  

 supply in the lifeboat.
 16.3 If the spray system is supplied from a pump driven from the lifeboat  

 engine simple and readily operable means shall be provided to control the  

 output of the pump without damaging the pump so that the lifeboat may be used  

 for normal duties without the spray pump operating.
 16.4 The spray system shall be capable of being flushed through with fresh  

 water after it has been tested in sea water and any necessary fittings shall  

 be supplied with the lifeboat.
 16.5 The spray system shall be tested on each lifeboat to demonstrate  

 adequate coverage of the lifeboat.
 16.6 The spray pump shall be readily accessible for maintenance.
 16.7 The spray system shall be fitted with suitable arrangements to enable  

 the system to be automatically drained to prevent frost damage in cold  

 conditions.
17. INSTRUCTIONS AND CONTROLS 17.1 Where practicable all controls shall be centralized at the helmsman's  

 position but in any case they shall be positioned so that the number of  

 persons required to operate them is a minimum.
17.2 Notices shall be provided regarding the operation of the controls for  

 the air supply, water spray system and other controls provided within the  

 lifeboat.
These notices shall be clear and easily readable and situated at  

 both the operating position and the helmsman's position.
 17.3 A comprehensive instruction manual shall be supplied with each  

 lifeboat and the recommended frequency and details of testing of the special  

 equipment shall be included in the manual.
 17.4 The notices and instructions shall be in the languages as may be  

 required by the Participating Authority in the importing country,  

 supplemented wherever feasible by pictorial methods of explanation.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR TOTALLY ENCLOSED LIFEBOATS Appendix 1 SELF RIGHTING TEST This test is carried out to confirm the self righting characteristics of  

 the fully loaded boat.
 1. The boat shall be fully loaded with weights to  

 represent the full number of persons for which the boat is certified together  

 with boat equipment.
 2. The weights shall be at the normal operating  

 positions where possible secured by the seat belts.
 3. A strap shall be arranged with one end attached to  

 a lifting appliance and the other secured in such a way that the boat can be  

 rotated through 180 degrees about a fore and aft axis.
4. The boat shall be rotated by the strap.
To ensure  

 that there is no position of intermediate stability, lifting shall be carried  

 out incrementally and the boat shall tend to return to the upright position  

 wherever the lifting appliance is released.
 5. Rotation shall continue to 180 degrees when the  

 boat shall right completing 360 degrees rotation.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR TOTALLY ENCLOSED LIFEBOATS Appendix 2 ENGINE TEST PROCEDURE The following tests are required to confirm that the engine will, as  

 required by this common requirement, operate during and after capsize, and  

 are additional to normal lifeboat engine tests.
The engine to be tested, together with its fuel tank, shall be mounted on  

 a rotable frame.
The frame shall be arranged so that the engine and fuel tank  

 can be rotated about an axis equivalent to the fore and aft axis of the boat.
 The following full speed tests shall be carried out:
 1. Start engine and run for 5 min.
 2. Stop engine and turn through 360 degrees in a  

 clockwise direction.
 3. Restart engine and run for ten min.
 4. Stop engine and turn through 360 degrees in an  

 anticlockwise direction.
 5. Restart engine, run for ten min then shut down.
 6. Allow engine to cool down.
 7. Start engine and run for 5 min.
 8. Rotate engine in a clockwise direction through 180  

 degrees, hold at the 180 degrees position for 10 s then rotate a further 180  

 degrees in clockwise direction to complete one revolution.
 9. Allow engine to continue to run for 10 min.
 10. Repeat point 8 turning in an anticlockwise  

 direction.
 11. Repeat point 9.
12. Rotate engine in a clockwise direction through 180  

 degrees and stop engine.
Rotate a further 180 degrees to complete one  

 clockwise revolution.
 13. Restart engine and run for 10 min.
 14. Repeat point 12 turning anticlockwise.
 15. Restart engine run for 10 min then shut down.
 16. Strip engine for examination.
 17. The boat with the engine fitted and running shall  

 be turned through 360 degrees and the engine shall continue to run throughout  

 the capsizal and for 10 min after, unless arranged to stop automatically  

 during capsize.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR TOTALLY ENCLOSED LIFEBOATS Appendix 3 FIRE TEST 1. A fire test is to be carried out as may be required  

 by the Participating Authority to confirm that the boat is resistant to  

 flames and heat and can safely suppport the life of the full complement in  

 »fire on the water« conditions for at least 5 min.
 2. The boat shall be moored in a test area, sufficient  

 oil (kerosene) shall be pumped on the water in the test area to sustain a  

 fire which will completely envelope the boat for the specified time.
 3. The boat shall be moored with the engine running at  

 full speed and sprays working at commencement of the test; the propeller need  

 not be turning.
4. The temperature shall be recorded at various  

 positions on the inside surface and internally at positions which will be  

 taken up by the occupants.
The arrangements shall be such that maximum  

 temperatures attained are recorded.
 5. The inside atmosphere shall be continuously sampled  

 and the samples analysed for the presence of toxic or injurious gases or  

 substances.
 6. The pressure inside the boat shall be continuously  

 recorded in order to confirm that positive inside pressure is maintained.
 7. The test report shall contain details of the  

 readings for temperature, pressure and toxic or injurious substances and  

 gases.
 8. Subject to the physical conditions of the boat  

 after the test acceptance will be conditional upon a report from an  

 independent competent authority to the effect that the inside atmosphere and  

 conditions will sustain human life for the specified time.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF GANGWAYS AND ACCOMMODATION LADDERS INCLUDING PLATFORMS (Only SI units are used in the common requirements given in the following  

 pages.
Except for units of length the table below sets out the corresponding  

 metric and imperial units) Paragraph SI unit Metric unit Imperial unit 2.3 4,0 kN/sqm 408 kp/sqm 83,5 lbf/sqft 2.4 5,0 kN/sqm 510 kp/sqm 104 lbf/sqft 3.5 2 x 0,75 kN 2 x 76 kp 2 x 169 lbf 0,75 kN 76 kp 169 lbf 3.6 1,0 kN 102 kp 225 lbf 2 x 1,0 kN 2 x 102 kp 2 x 225 lbf 4.1 4,0 kN/sqm 408 kp/sqm 83,5 lbf/sqft 4.3 5,0 kN/sqm 510 kp/sqm 104 lbf/sqft 4.4 0,36 sqm 0,36 sqm 3,9 sqft 4.6 5,0 kN/sqm 510 kp/sqm 104 lbf/sqft 4.7 6,0 kN/sqm 612 kp/sqm 125 lbf/sqft COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF GANGWAYS AND ACCOMMODATION LADDERS INCLUDING PLATFORMS In force since 20th November 1976 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. GENERAL 1.1 Gangways, accommodation ladders and other means of access, including  

 platforms, shall be type-approved.
 1.2 Means of access shall be constructed with a safety factor of at least  

 2,5 in relation to the guaranteed yield point of the material (for aluminium  

 the yield point is calculated at a permanent alongation of 0,2 per cent).
1.3 Means of access shall be provided with necessary fastening rings, eye  

 plates or similar fittings so it can be secured safely with chains, ropes or  

 similar attachments.
Eye plates, mountings for lashings, rings, attachments  

 for suspension, ropes (strops) etc. shall be made of steel or equivalent  

 material.
 1.4 Between aluminium and steel there shall be insulation of  

 non-hygroscopic material by means of an approved method.
1.5 Means of access in the form of a gangway, accommodation ladder or  

 similar construction and associated platforms shall be equipped with guard  

 rails on both sides with at least two courses in its whole length.
The height  

 of the rail, distance between stanchions and the number of courses shall be  

 to the satisfaction of the Participating Authority.
 1.6 Means of access which in a turned out position may rest on the quay or  

 similar, shall be provided with a roller or wheels at the lower end.
 1.7 Means of access shall at the lower end be provided with a device so  

 that a protective net can be fastened and spread out in a suitable way.
 1.8 Gangways and accommodation ladders shall at an easily visible place be  

 provided with a conspicuous notice indicating the highest and lowest  

 inclination to the horizontal at which the means of access may be used.
1.9 Fixed guard rails which form an integral part of the means of access  

 may be taken into account in calculating the strength.
Such fixed guard rails  

 shall not be removed during the load test.
 1.10. Chains, shackles, rings etc. which are used for suspension or  

 heaving of commodation ladders or gangways shall be tested and certified and  

 have a safety factor against breaking of 5. Cordage shall be of certified  

 strength and have a safety factor against breaking of 8. Wire ropes shall be  

 of certified strength and have a safety factor against breaking of 6.
2. CONSTRUCTIONAL PROVISIONS FOR GANGWAYS 2.1 Gangways shall have a clear width of step and between handrails or  

 guard rails of at least 550 mm.
2.2 Gangways shall be provided with suitably shaped transverse treads,  

 which give satisfactory foothold for the permitted inclination of the  

 gangway.
The distance between the treads shall not be more than 400 mm or  

 less than 300 mm measured along the gangway.
The gangway shall be provided  

 with nonskid surface.
2.3 Gangways shall be calculated for a distributed static load of 4,0  

 kN/sqm plus the weight of the gangway.
The area subjected to the load is  

 calculated as the length of the gangway multiplied by the width between the  

 barriers.
The gangway shall have sufficient security against buckling and the  

 strength shall be checked.
2.4 Before any gangway is type-approved a prototype shall be test-loaded  

 in a horizontal position, without guard rails other than fixed guard rails  

 taken into account in the strength calculation, and supported at both ends  

 only and in the normal way as carried on board.
The test load shall be at  

 least 5,0 kN/sqm and be evenly distributed.
The deflection must not be more  

 than 1/100 for steel and 1/75 for aluminium of the length of the gangway.
No  

 permanent deformation shall remain after the tests.
 2.5 If a gangway shall be used also as an accommodation ladder the  

 requirement in section 3 shall be complied with.
3. CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCOMMODATION  

 LADDERS 3.1 Accommodation ladders shall have a clear width of step and between  

 handrails or guard rails of at least 550 mm.
3.2 Accommodation ladders shall have adjustable steps or other design  

 which will provide satisfactory foothold for all inclination angles between 0  

 and 55 degrees to the horizontal.
The steps shall be provided with a non-skid  

 surface.
 3.3 Fixed steps are only allowed on accommodation ladders which have  

 inclination angles of 20-50 degrees to the horizontal.
 3.4 Accommodation ladders shall be provided with an upper and a lower  

 platform.
3.5 Accommodation ladders with a clear step-length of 550 mm not exceeding  

 600 mm shall be calculated for a static load of at least 0,75 kN placed at  

 the middle of each step plus the weight of the accommodation ladder.
Where  

 the step-length is more than 600 mm but not exceeding 1000 mm the  

 accommodation ladder shall be calculated for a static load of 2 x 0,75 kN on  

 each step, i.e. 0,75 kN each placed 1/4 of the step-length from the inner  

 side of the stringer plus the weight of the accommodation ladder.
The  

 accommodation ladder shall have sufficient security against buckling and the  

 strength shall be checked.
3.6 Before any accommodation ladder is type-approved a prototype shall be  

 test-loaded in a horizontal position and supported at the ends only and in a  

 normal way as on board.
The test loads on each step shall be at least 1,0 kN  

 or 2 x 1,0 kN and be placed as stated in 3.5. During the first test the  

 deflection shall not be more than 1/100 for steel and 1/75 for aluminium of  

 the length of the accommodation ladder and no permanent deformation shall  

 remain after the tests.
 3.7 If an accommodation ladder shall be used also as a gangway the rules  

 in section 2 shall be complied with.
4. CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATFORMS ON  

 GANGWAYS AND ACCOMMODATION LADDERS 4.1 The upper platform and intermediate platforms shall be calculated for  

 a distributed static load of 4,0 kN/sqm plus the weight of the accommodation  

 ladder or gangway suspended in the most unfavourable position with the load  

 which is stated in 2.3 or 3.5.
 4.2 The upper platform shall preferably be provided with means for turning  

 so that the means of access is easy to turn towards the quay.
 4.3 The lower platform shall be calculated for a distributed static load  

 of 5,0 kN/sqm.
 4.4 Platforms shall have a free surface of at least 0,36 sqm.
 4.5 The lower platform shall have a strong rail or standchion.
4.6 Platforms which shall be used together with a typeapproved  

 accommodation ladder shall be test-loaded together with this type of  

 accommodation ladder and/or gangway.
The test load for the upper and  

 intermediate platform, if any, shall be at least 5,0 kN/sqm plus 50 per cent  

 of the total weight of the accommodation ladder or gangway and lower platform  

 as stated in 2.4 and 3.6 (for intermediate platforms, 50 per cent af that  

 part which is suspended below the platform).
4.7 The platform shall during the test be suspended in a normal way as on  

 board and the test load for accommodation ladders or gangways shall be  

 suspended from the intended attachment point.
The lower platform shall be  

 suspended in a normal way from the accommodation ladder and/or gangway and be  

 test-loaded with 6,0 kN/sqm.
5. TYPE APPROVAL Application for type approval for means of access shall be made to the  

 Participating Authority.
The application for approval shall be accompanied by  

 detailed drawings and calculations in triplicate with information of the safe  

 working load for which the means of access is constructed.
Type-designation and name under which the means of access is intended to  

 be sold shall be specified.
A gangway may be type-approved without a  

 platform.
6. TEST ON BOARD Shipboard tests shall be to the satisfaction of the Participating  

 Authority of the country of registry.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR LIFE-JACKETS (Only Si units are used in the common requirements given in the following  

 pages.
The table below sets out the corresponding metric and imperial units) Paragraph SI-unit Metric unit Imperial unit 4.1 0.8 kN/50 mm 81.6 kp/50 mm 179.9 lbf/1.97 in 4.2 0.5 kN/50 mm 51.0 kp/50 mm 112.4 lbf/1.97 in 9.1 60 kg 60 kg 132 lb 70 kg 70 kg 154 lb 80 kg 80 kg 176 lb COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR LIFE-JACKETS In force since 1st November 1979 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11 of the  

 Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating Authority if  

 there are any national requirements additional to the provisions of these  

 common requirements.
1. GENERAL A life-jacket shall comply with SOLAS, Chapter III, Regulation 22 (c), and  

 in addition with the following requirements.
It shall also fulfil the  

 recommended performance test according to IMCO Resolution A 169/ES IV as  

 further specified under section 9.
2. MATERIALS Materials shall be of a type which satisfies the Participating Authority.  

 Tests shall be carried out on samples of materials and components as supplied  

 for use in the manufacture of the life-jacket, and as far as practicable in  

 the form in which it is intended that they shall be incorporated.
3. TESTS ON BUOYANCY MATERIALS MADE OF FOAM Such buoyancy materials shall be subject to the following tests, which are  

 to be carried out after the removal of any skin or rind and with clean cuts.
3.1 The materials shall be able to resist temperatures between minus 30  

 degrees C and plus 65 degrees C.
The specimens are to be alternately  

 submitted for 7 h to air temperatures of plus 65 degrees and minus 30 degrees  

 C.
Ten complete cycles are to be carried out, viz.:
 A 7 h cycle at plus 65 degrees C plus minus 2 degrees to be completed in  

 one day.
 A 7 h cycle at minus 30 degrees C plus minus 2 degrees C to be completed  

 the same day.
After completion of the ten cycles (a) to (d) the materials must show no  

 sign either of external or of internal changes of structure or of mechanical  

 qualities.
Reduction of buoyancy must not exceed 5 per cent.
3.2 Buoyancy materials shall both before and after the temperature test,  

 cfr. 3.1, be tested for resistance to oil and oil products according to  

 Swedish Standard SIS 882221, point 7. After the tests the materials must show  

 no sign of damage such as shrinking, swelling, dissolution or changes of  

 mechanical qualities.
Reduction of buoyancy must not exceed 5 per cent.
4. MATERIALS FOR COVER, TAPES AND SEAMS 4.1 The new materials, after rotproofing, if required, shall have a  

 tensile strength of not less than 0.8 kN/50 mm, determined in accordance with  

 British Standard BS 2576: 1967.
 4.2 The materials shall be resistent to exposure to ultraviolet radiation.  

 When the materials have been exposes to light, minimum to class 5 - 6, in  

 accordance with ISO 105 BO2 - 1978, »Normal Condition«, the tensile  

 strength determined in accordance with British Standard BS 2576: 1967 shall  

 not be less than 0.5 kN/50 mm.
 4.3 Seams shall be to the satisfaction of the Participating Authority.
 4.4 The materials shall be able to resist temperatures between minus 30  

 degrees C and plus 65 degrees C and shall be tested in accordance with the  

 test for buoyancy materials, cfr. 3.1., with the additional requirment that  

 the materials shall be capable of being folded at minus 30 degrees without  

 damage.
4.5 The materials shall be resistent to oil and oil products.
They shall  

 be tested in accordance with the test for buoyancy matrials, cfr. 3.2.
 4.6 The covers shall be of a highly visible colour (for example strong  

 yellow or red orange).
 Colour fastness:
5. METAL PARTS OF LIFE-JACKETS The materials shall be resistant to corrosion.
They shall be tested  

 according to British Standard BS 1391: 1952, part 2. After 100 h there must  

 be no sign of corrosion.
6. RETRO-REFLECTIVE TAPES 6.1 Each life-jacket shall on the outside and on the inside be fitted with  

 six retro-reflective tapes of 50 mm x 100 mm.
These tapes shall be placed as  

 high up on the jacket as possible.
 6.2 The retro-reflective tapes shall meet the conditions set by the United  

 States Government Specification LS-300-A of january 1970.
7. FIRE TEST ON COMPLETED LIFE-JACKET Where required by a Participating Authority a fire test shall be carried  

 out on the completed life-jacket in accordance with Swedish Standard KOV  

 513-3773-1.
8. ASSESSMENT OF BUOYANCY IN FRESH WATER OF COMPLETED LIFE-JACKET Buoyancy in fresh water of a completed life-jacket shall be determined in  

 accordance with Swedish Standard SIS 882221, point 2. Reduction of total  

 buoyancy must not exceed 5 per cent in 24 h.
9. PERFORMANCE TESTS The test shall be carried out with at least six persons of the following  

 heights and weights:
Height Weight 1.40 m - 1.60 m 1 person under 60 kg 1 person over 60 kg over 1.60 m - 1.80 m 1 person under 70 kg 1 person over 70 kg over 1.80 m 1 person under 80 kg 1 person over 80 kg Two of the persons shall be females.
As far as possible similar criteria  

 shall be applied in the approval of life-jackets for children.
10. WHISTLE 10.1 The whistle shall be non-metallic and be fastened to the jacket by a  

 cord of suitable length.
 10.2 The whistle must not be adversely affected by water or humidity.
11. OTHER TESTS Other methods of testing the materials etc. will be accepted if it is  

 proved to the satisfaction of the Participating Authority that the tests  

 indicate the appropriate qualitative characteristic of materials and that the  

 test results correspond to the requirements laid down.
12. RESERVATION AS TO APPROVAL Notwithstanding that a life-jacket or the materials incorporated satisfy  

 the requirements laid down above the Participating Authority may reject a  

 life-jacket when it is found unfit for its purpose.
13. MARKINGS A life-jacket shall be clearly and permanently marked with the name of the  

 manufacturer or his trade mark, with the name under which the jacket is sold,  

 the year of manufacture, and with a mark showing by which Participating  

 Authority it has been approved.
Life-jackets intended for use by children  

 shall be suitably marked to indicate this.
The markings shall be approved by  

 the Participating authority and shall be in the language or languages  

 stipulated by the Participating Authority.
COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR TYPE TESTING OF FIRE ALARM CABINETS AND ELECTRICAL COMPONENT PARTS FOR FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS In force since 1 December 1984 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 1.1 As SOLAS Convention 74 chapter II-2 Regulation 13 and any relevant  

 amendment thereto.
 1.2 Electrical Check Where appropriate, an insulation test and a high  

 voltage test shall be carried out as indicated below.
Insulation resistance test An insulation resistance test is to be carried out on electrical equipment  

 prior to the functional test.
It is to be repeated at the conclusion of the  

 cyclic damp heat test.
 The minimum insulation resistance values shown in the following table  

 shall be obtained between supply terminals and earth.
Rated Supply Test-Voltage Insulation Resistance Voltage d.c.
Functional  

 Damp Heat test test up to 65 V 2 x supply voltage 10 M omega 1 M omega minimum 24 V over 65 V 500 V 100 M omega 10 M omega High voltage test The equipment under test shall be capable of withstanding a high a.c.  

 voltage for one minute, between live parts and earth, the test voltage being  

 selected from the following table.
Rated Insulation Test Voltage Voltage a.c. or d.c. a.c.
Up to 60 1000 60 - 300 2000 300 - 660 2500 660 - 800 3000 800 - 1000 3500 Where very low voltage equipment is to be tested, the test voltage may be  

 reduced to 500 V a.c.
The test voltage frequency shall be between 45 Hz and  

 62 Hz.
 The test shall be carried out prior to and after the tests required by  

 Sections 3 and 4.
2. VISUAL INSPECTION 2.1 Before commencement of the tests described in sections 3 and 4 the  

 test specimen shall, in open condition, be subjected to a thorough visual  

 inspection during which its conditions is ascertained and assessed.
 2.2 This assessment shall include mechanical composition, quality of  

 components and material, quality of workmanship including surface treatment,  

 soldering and attachment, etc.
 2.2.1 Where it can be directly ascertained that the specimen will fail  

 during subsequent environmental tests, the testing institution or the testing  

 society shall inform the Participating Authority to that effect.
3. FUNCTIONAL TESTING 3.1 During the functional testing the specimen shall be placed in  

 atmospheric conditions as follows:
 Temperature between 15 degrees C and 35 degrees C, relative humidity  

 between 45 per cent and 75 per cent, air pressure between 860 mbar and 1060  

 mbar and otherwise as described in IEC publication 68-1, sub-clause 5.3.
 3.2 With normal power supply all the functions specified by the  

 Participating Authority for the paricular case shall be tested.
3.3 The power supply for the test specimen shall be switched off and on  

 momentarily on three successive occasions at intervals of not more than five  

 minutes.
After each connection of the power supply, the specimen shall be  

 capable of functioning satisfactorily without manual intervention.
 3.4 The test specimen shall be capable of functioning as stated in 3.2 at  

 simulated stationary deviations of the power supply of plus 10 per cent and  

 minus 15 per cent of the rated voltage and plus 5 per cent and minus 5 per  

 cent respectively of the frequency.
 To simulate the marine environment, the fire detection control and  

 indicating panel shall be tested by subjection to transients in the main  

 power supply voltage of plus minus 20 per cent and a frequency transient of  

 plus minus 10 per cent in a transient recovery time of 3 seconds, and for  

 fluctuation in battery supply voltage of plus 30 per cent to minus 25 per  

 cent.
4. ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 4.1 The functional tests required by this section shall be carried out  

 according to 3.2, provided that deviations from the nominal frequency may be  

 omitted.
 4.2 CYCLIC DAMP HEAT TESTING shall be carried out in accordance with IEC  

 publications 68-2-30, Test Db, with 2 cycles, an upper temperature of 55  

 degrees C, and the 24 hour cycle in accordance with variant 1.
 4.2.1 Apart from the time referred to under the below mentioned functional  

 test, the test specimen shall be switched off during the humidity exposure.  

 Functional testing shall be carried out according to 4.1 at the following  

 times in the course of the humidity exposure:
 During the first cycle within one hour after achieving 55 degrees C  

 chamber temperature.
 During the second cycle within one hour of the end of the 55 degrees C  

 phase.
 4.2.2 Immediately after the end of the second cycle functional testing  

 shall be carried out according to 4.1. The functional testing shall be  

 concluded with visual inspection during which the condition of the test  

 specimen for any corrosion damage shall be ascertained.
 4.3 VIBRATION TESTING shall be carried out in atmospheric conditions  

 corresponding to those described in 3.1. During testing the specimen shall be  

 switched on and it shall be oriented and mounted by normal means of  

 attachment.
 The specimen shall be vibrated in three directions perpendicular to one  

 another at levels and within frequency ranges as follows:
Frequency Amplitude/Acceleration 3 to 13 Hz 1 mm 13 to 80 Hz 0.7 g Resonance searching shall be undertaken within the frequency ranges  

 specified.
The frequency change shall be continuous, corresponding to not  

 more than one octave per minute.
 4.3.1 Resonance searching and endurance testing shall be undertaken as  

 follows:
Where acceleration factors of amplification exceeding 5 are ascertained at  

 resonance frequencies or otherwise during acceleration within the frequency  

 range specified, endurance conditioning shall be carried out, the duration of  

 which shall be at least two hours for each point.
Where acceleration factors  

 of amplification of less than 5 are ascertained at resonance frequencies or  

 otherwise during acceleration within the frequency range specified, the  

 endurance conditioning shall be undertaken at one frequency, i.e. the  

 frequency giving the greatest amplification factor.
 If during resonance searching no resonance or acceleration is ascertained,  

 endurance conditioning shall be carried out of a duration of not less than  

 two hours at 0.7 g and 13 Hz.
Furthermore, the testing procedure as specified in IEC publications  

 68-2-6, sub-clauses 5.2, 5.2.1, 5.2.2.2 and 5.2.3 shall be followed.
Within  

 the last half hour of each endurance conditioning in each direction,  

 functional testing shall be carried out in accordance with 4.1.
4.4 HEAT TESTING of a duration as specified by the Participating Authority  

 shall be carried out according to IEC publication 68-2-2, Test Bb.
The upper  

 temperature shall be 55 degrees C or higher as determined by the  

 Participating Authority in each particular case.
The test specimen shall be  

 switched on during the entire conditioning period.
 Within the last half hour of the heat testing, functional testing shall be  

 carried out according to 4.1. After conclusion of the heat testing, the test  

 specimen shall be opened up and examined visually to ascertain the condition  

 of the specimen.
4.5 COLD TESTING shall be carried out according to IEC publication 68-2-1,  

 Test Ab. at a temperature of 5 degrees for specimens for interior use and  

 minus 25 degrees C for specimens which are to be used in the open air.
The  

 test specimen shall in the switched off condition be exposed to the specified  

 conditions for a duration as specified by the Participating Authority.
Within  

 the last half hour of the cold conditioning, functional testing shall be  

 carried out according to 4.1. After conclusion of the cold testing, the test  

 specimen shall be opened up and examined visually to ascertain the condition  

 of the specimen.
 4.6 Depending on the location of the equipment the Participating Authority  

 may require either of the two following SALT MISTING TESTS:
 The pH value shall lie between 6.5 and 7.2.
 When the test specimen in the switched off condition and in closed  

 condition has been kept in the mist chamber for 48 hours it shall be removed  

 and left for 16 hours in atmospheric conditions as sepcified under sub-clause  

 3.1 whereupon functional testing shall be undertaken according to 4.1. After  

 functional testing, visual inspection shall be made during which the  

 condition of the specimen, including any corrosion damage, is ascertained.
It is essential that there be no contamination of the salt solution being  

 sprayed.
Salt solution dripping from the walls and ceilings of the chamber,  

 and from the equipment, must not be resprayed.
The spraying is to continue for 2 hours, after which the equipment is to  

 be maintained at a temperature of 35 degrees C plus minus 2 degrees C with a  

 relative humidity of between 90 and 95 per cent for a period of 7 days.
The  

 process of exposing the equipment to salt spray laden atmosphere for 2 hours  

 and of storage for 7 days at 35 degrees C plus minus 2 degrees C and 90 to 95  

 per cent relative humidity is to be carried out four times.
 At the end of the 28 days treatment, the equipment is to be examined for  

 corrosion and deterioration of metal parts, finishes, materials and  

 components, and it is to be given a full performance test.
 The salt solution is to be prepared by dissolving the substances listed  

 below in distilled water and making up the volume of the solution to 1 litre.  

 The proportions of the ingredients in the solution are to be within 10 per  

 cent of those shown:
Sodium Chloride NaC1 26.5 g Magnesium Chloride MgC12 2.4 g Magnesium Sulphate MgSO4 3.3 g Calcium Chloride CaC12 1.1 g Potassium Chloride KC1 0.73 g Sodium Bicarbonate NaHCO3 0.20 g Sodium Bromide NaBr 0.28 g 5. The environmental testing shall be completed prior  

 to the fire testing of the specimens.
 5.1 Thermal detectors shall be tested in accordance with CEN (European  

 Committee for Standardization) standard EN 54, part 5. Vibration tests shall,  

 however, in addition be conducted on three mutually perpendicular planes.
