 Bilag: »EUROLOG Handbook of Basic Texts on Collaborative  

 Support«.
 1. I overensstemmelse med EUROGROUP's deklaration om  

 logistisk samarbejde af 7 maj 1975 (bilag side 3) publiceres herved  

 "EUROLOG Handbook of Basic Texts on collaborative Support".
 2. Ved udarbejdelse af bi- eller multilaterale  

 materielmæssige samarbejdsaftaler mellem danske og øvrige EUROGROUP nationers  

 myndigheder skal de i bilaget omhandlede principper og procedurer i videst  

 muligt omfang søges efterlevet.
EB I.B.RODHOLM kontreadmiral chef for Materielstaben CONTENTS Fordeling: Standardfordeling.
BILAG: Page Foreword 1 Declaration on Eurogroup Principles of Co-operation in Logistics 3 Guidelines for Collaboration in Logistic Follow-on- Support for Major Weapons/Equipment to be introduced in Eurogroup Countries 7 Practical Procedures for Development of Collaborative Follow-on Logistic Support for New Common Equipments 13 FOREWORD BY THE CHAIRMAN OF EUROLOG EUROLOG (* 1) has been working for some years on devising arrangements to  

 ensure that opportunities for co-ordinated logistic support of collaborative  

 equipment projects are not prejudiced through decisions taken early in the  

 life of a project.
Now that the three main documents involved are in final  

 form and have been agreed or endorsed as appropriate by Eurogroup Ministers,  

 it is timely to publish them together in this booklet, together with an  

 explanation of their usefulness, not only to logistic staffs, but also to  

 those working in the field of procurement who might be asked to respond to  

 requests for assistance from logisticians.
The management of international weapons projects is far from simple.
The  

 factors underlying decisions increase in proportion to the number of  

 countries.
Worse, countries may join or leave at different stages.
The result  

 is that such weapons projects often have at their foundations a complex web  

 of agreements and understandings between countries, agencies, consortia and  

 firms.
During this early and crucial stage it is unlikely that much thought  

 will have been given to the logistic support of the weapon - after all, the  

 procurement staffs are quite rightly giving all their attention to ensuring  

 that the Armed Forces receive the desired equipment at the right time.
 The eventual equipment has, however, to be supported by logisticians for  

 perhaps twenty years and the cost of this in-service phase can be of the same  

 order as the initial outlay.
 Unfortunately, it is often the case that the very practical and necessary  

 decisions reached by procurement authorities mean that it is difficult,  

 sometimes impossible, to set up rational, cooperative logistic support and  

 thereby reap the benfits - economy, standardisation, flexibility - that were  

 supposed to flow from the collaboration.
With this in mind EUROLOG formulated Principles of Co-operation  in  

 Logistics which picked up a theme from EURONAD's Principles of Equipment  

 Collaboration that co-ordinated logistics should be automatically considered  

 as part of any collaborative project.
In London on 7 May 1975 EUROGROUP  

 Ministers signed a Declaration (reproduced in this booklet) adopting the  

 Logistics Principles.
 It remained to ensure that the Principles were translated into practice.  

 EUROLOG therefore drew up Guidelines which gave more specific direction as to  

 how co-operative logistic support of collaborative weapons should be pursued.  

 This document too was approved by EUROGROUP Ministers.
The task now fell on EUROLOG and its sub-groups to monitor the  

 implementation of the Principles and Guidelines.
To give national logistics  

 staffs some guidance as to what logistics considerations should be taken into  

 account at the various stages of a project, a Procedure was drawn up, based  

 on the phases as defined in the NATO Periodic Armaments Planning System.
This  

 Procedure should encourage uniformity of practice between the EUROGROUP  

 countries.
It is not designed for literal application in every country,  

 because of differing administrative structures and practices but is intended  

 as a model which countries should strive to translate into their own context  

 through appropriate adjustments.
The successful application of these three documents rest on close liaison  

 between logistics and procurement staffs.
In some countries this is  

 accomplished automatically through integration of the two functions.
In  

 others there is a difficult gap to bridge.
Recognizing the problem of those  

 logistics staffs who do not have automatic access to procurement staffs,  

 Ministers acknowledged (EG/27/80 (Final)) in 1980 »that national members  

 of EUROLOG Sub-Groups were exercising their monitoring responsibilities in  

 regard to arrangements for follow-on logistic support of collaborative  

 weapons projects on behalf of EUROGROUP Ministers and with authority derived  

 from them«.
 I hope that this booklet, which brings into one volume the fruits of five  

 years work by EUROLOG, will be of assistance (and perhaps also an  

 inspiration) to procurement and logistics staff, national and international.
Air Vice Marshal J J Miller Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Personnel and Logistics) MOD United Kingdom Chairman, EUROLOG DECLARATION ON EUROGROUP PRINCIPLES OF CO-OPERATION IN LOGISTICS The Ministers of Defence of Belgium, Denmark, the Federal Republic of  

 Germany, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Turkey and the  

 United Kingdom:
Desiring to achieve a greater measure of collaboration in logistic support  

 among European member states of the North Atlantic Alliance; Anxious to make optimum use of their logistic resources; on 7 May 1975 adopted the Principles of Co-operation in Logistics set out  

 in the Annex herewith as a basis for common action.
 Ministers confirm their understanding that each will:
- Act in compliance with these principles; - Disseminate them within his national Defence Ministry; - Instruct all those of his staffs who have responsibility for logistics  

 to act in accordance with these principles.
1. One of the important overall objectives of the  

 Eurogroup is to increase co-operation in defence among member nations.
The  

 field of logistics is one in which there is scope for improvements of this  

 kind.
Although the provision of logistic support for NATO-assigned forces is  

 at present a national responsibility, closer collaboration in logistic  

 support will enable member countries whose forces are deployed in the same  

 area with similar or complementary operational responsibilities to make more  

 efficient and economical use of their logistic resources.
2. The ultimate objective is to achieve the closest  

 possible integration of logistics systems among Eurogroup members in respect  

 of the forces they assign to NATO.
This is, however, dependent on fundamental  

 changes in the arrangements for financing those logistics systems and for the  

 procurement of equipment; and also on the achievement of much greater  

 standardization of weapons and equipment than exists at present.
In the  

 meantime, worthwhile progress towards the objective can be made by developing  

 co- operative logistic arrangements and co-ordinated procedures wherever the  

 opportunity exists and greater efficiency and cost-effectiveness would  

 result.
II PRINCIPLES 3. The following principles have been drawn up to  

 provide a basis for co-operation in the field of logistic support:.
a.
New Collaborative Projects for Weapons Systems and Major  Equipments.  

 Practical possibilities of collaboration in support of weapons systems and  

 major equipments (egg, maintenance, repair and spares provisioning) are  

 limited by the differences between weapons and equipments at present used by  

 the member countries.
A major effort is now being made by Eurogroup contries  

 through the work of EURONAD to promote standardization of new weapons and  

 equipment by means of collaborative projects.
Member countries have already  

 agreed in the Principles of Equipment Collaboration that the requirement to  

 attempt to evolve co-ordinated arrangements for follow-on support be an  

 automatic accompaniment of any collaborative procurement project.
EUROLOG  

 will work with the relevant agencies to satisfy themselves that appropriate  

 arrangements are being made in each case.
b.
Other New Equipment Projects . Member countries agree that a similar  

 effort to evolve co-ordinated arrangements for follow-on support should be  

 made when any new weapon or equipment is under consideration or adopted by  

 two or more countries, whether or not the particular item is categorized as a  

 collaborative procurement project.
c.
Existing Weapons or Equipments.
Member countries agree that  

 consideration should be given to the possibility of co-operation in the  

 logistic support of existing weapons and equipments used by more than one  

 country which are not already the subject of co-operative arrangements.
d.
Harmonization of Logistic Procedures.
Member countries agree that every  

 effort will be made to harmonize/standardize logistic procedures with the  

 object of achieving increased flexibility in logistic support.
e.
Future Logistic Planning.
Member countries agree that they should  

 exchange information regularly about logistics, including information on  

 planned logistic projects, with the general aim of enabling others to join in  

 such projects if this would be of advantage.
They agree also that there  

 should be a regular exchange of information on the evaluation of national  

 logistic concepts.
III METHOD OF IMPLEMENTATION 4. Responsibility for implementation of these  

 principles lies with Eurogroup countries, under the directiom of Eurogroup  

 Ministers.
The sub-group established in the field of logistics (EUROLOG) has  

 so far devoted its main efforts to examining the possibilities of logistics  

 co-operation between the land forces in the Northern Army Group, between the  

 air forces in the Second Allied Tactical Air Force and between the navies  

 which operate in the Channel and the North Sea.
The countries providing these  

 forces are at present represented on EUROLOG.
It is open to other Eurogroup  

 countries to join EUROLOG when subjects of interest to them are under  

 consideration.
GUIDELINES POR COLLABORATION IN LOGISTIC FOLLOW-ON SUPPORT FOR MAJOR  

 WEAPONS/EQUIPMENT TO BE INTRODUCED IN EUROGROUP COUNTRIES 1. INTRODUCTION The logistics required for the efficient and economical support of a new  

 weapon or major equipment, being introduced into the forces of two or more of  

 the EUROGROUP countries under collaborative or other arrangements, are  

 dependent upon such a wide range of factors that it is not possible to lay  

 down detailed procedures for universal application.
Some guidelines for the  

 development of logistic support for such projects can be laid down, however,  

 providing it is accepted that the final arrangements are likely to vary in  

 each case.
This memorandum has therefore been prepared by EUROLOG to provide  

 general guidance to nations considering the logistic support needed for  

 common weapon systems or major equipment to be used by two or more of the  

 EUROGROUP countries.
2. AIM It is of the first importance to increase substantially the extent and  

 depth of the follow-on support of the defence equipment of the participating  

 countries.
The aim of these guidelines is to ensure the adoption of a  

 consultative process among the EUROGROUP countries which lead to their  

 improved collaboration, with particular reference to the avoidance of  

 wasteful duplication among the participating countries in this area and the  

 realisation of both the economic and military benefits of enhanced  

 standardisation.
The guidelines are in this respect an extension and  

 implementation of the approved »Principles of Co-operation in  

 Logistics« 3. GENERAL GUIDELINES a.
The prime object of the participating nations should be to establish  

 collaborative arrangements for the follow-on support of any collaborative or  

 other new weapon/equipment project, as already agreed by EUROGROUP nations in  

 paragraph 9 of the »Principles of Equipment Collaboration«.
This  

 follow-on support should include, wherever possible, a most thorough  

 examination of all options for collaboration both in the procurement, holding  

 and distribution of spares and the provision of maintenance facilities (ie  

 servicing, repair and test facilities). A basic and substantial requirement  

 for any area of joint follow-on support is the commitment of all  

 participating countries to maintain wherever possible a uniform configuration  

 of the supported equipment.
b.
The preparation of follow-on logistic arrangements should normally be  

 undertaken by logisticians of the participating nations, who should consult  

 other appropriate staff or agencies as necessary.
Common NATO guidelines,  

 procedures and methods already in existence or being developed should be  

 taken into consideration.
c.
NAMSA was set up by the NATO nations to provide logistic support  

 facilities for common weapons and equipment where this could be undertaken  

 more effectively and economically than could be achived individually by  

 participating nations.
Thus consideration should always be given, as an  

 initial option, to the possibility of using the Agency for the logistic  

 support task.
If the participating nations decide to offer a task to NAMSA  

 the normal procedure is to request NAMSO (through the Board of Directors) to  

 initiate a feasibility study prior to either the formation of a Weapons  

 System Partnership (WSP) or alternatively, the establishment of a programme.  

 The undermentioned guidelines would also apply in the case of a WSP  

 agreement.
4. EUROLOG INVESTIGATIONS The investigation of major weapon systems and projects due to enter  

 service in the years ahead and the comprehensive joint examination of  

 national plans in these fields are essential to ensure that all worhtwhile  

 opportunities for collaboration are taken up.
To this end EUROLOG will be  

 assembling lists of new weapon systems to be introduced in the Services of  

 the EUROGROUP countries.
These lists will be kept under review periodically.  

 They will be updated by countries end examined jointly at least once a year.
5. GUIDELINES ON LOGISTICS ASPECTS a.
Co-ordination and Direction by participating Nations b.
Documentation.
A formal document (ie Memorandum of Understanding or WSP  

 agreement) should be drawn up describing and defining the co-ordinated  

 logistic support arrangements mutually agreed by the participants.
c.
Material Requirements.
The main object of co-ordinating the material  

 requirements for follow-on logistic support is to achieve the cost benefits  

 which can normally be expected from larger purchases (ie economies of scale)  

 and limiting overall stocks to the minimum by pooling stockholdings wherever  

 possible.
Among the factors to be considered are:
d.
Maintenance, Overhaul and Repair.
The main object is to establish  

 common or compatible maintenance policies so that engineering support  

 facilities can be fully utilised.
Among the factors to be considered are; e.
Inter-changeability.
In cases where a uniform configuration cannot be  

 obtained or maintained the participants should agree to the  

 interchangeability of assemblies and other component parts, wherever  

 practicable, so as to maximise cross servicing capabilities and minimise the  

 range of spares to be held centrally.
f.
Quality Assurance.
The participants should agree on the level and  

 extent of quality assurance to be adopted for:
g.
Finance.
Where support is carried out by NAMSA or another NATO agency  

 the normal arrangements for financing programmes undertaken by that Agency  

 will be followed.
In other cases it will be necessary for the participating  

 countries to agree appropriate arrangements for cost sharing.
6. GENERAL EUROLOG is responsible to the EUROGROUP Ministers for monitoring proposed  

 follow-on logistic arrangements for common weapon systems and major  

 equipments to ensure satisfactory arrangements are being made in each case.  

 These guidelines together with the Statement of Principles of Co-operation in  

 Logistics form a basis for such monitoring and consequent reports to  

 EUROGROUP.
PRACTICAL PROCEDURE FOR DEVELOPMENT OF COLLABORATIVE FOLLOW-ON LOGISTIC  

 SUPPORT FOR NEW COMMON EQUIPMENTS 1. This procedure is for use by national consumer  

 logistic planning staff when considering the follow-on logistic support  

 needed for common weapons systems or major equipments after they enter  

 service.
 2. Its purpose is to enable consumer logistic planning  

 staffs to comply with the EUROGROUP Principles of Co-operation in Logistics  

 by ensuring that all options for collaboration between participating nations  

 on follow-on support arrangements are fully considered during the early  

 phases of a collaborative project.
 3. All EUROGROUP nations have signed the Declaration  

 of Principles on Co-operation in Logistics and EUROLOG nations have issued  

 instructions within their own Ministries which require operational  

 requirement staff and production authorities to advise the appropriate  

 consumer logistic planning staff as soon as it is decided that new or  

 replacement equipment will be developed as a collaborative project and to  

 liaise with them in the development of collaborative follow-on support  

 arrangements through of the equipment development.
4. It is envisaged that the consumer logistic staff  

 will need to be involved from the beginning of the Pre-Concept/Staff Target  

 Development Phase through to the Acquisition/Procurement Phase.
This  

 procedure does not extend to the In Service Phase, since it is assumed that  

 logistic support planning will by then be largely completed and subject to  

 normal management action.
The checks to be made at each phase are set out  

 below.
5. Staff Target Development Phase a.
Receive notification from Operational Requirements Staff or production  

 authorities that the weapon or equipment is likely to be the subject of a  

 collaborative project.
b.
Ascertain c.
Consider to the extent possible at this stage the type and probable  

 extent of logistic support required and whether any special storage or  

 maintenance facilities are likely to be required.
d.
Consider whether there are any existing collaborative support  

 arrangements in force for the weapon being replaced or for similar weapons in  

 use by the participating nations and whether these could form the basis for  

 the planning of collaborative support for the new weapon.
e.
Consider to the extent possible at this stage whether NAMSA might be  

 able to provide support facilities and, if not, whether responsibility for  

 certain aspects of support eg configuration control, procurement of  

 materials, maintenance etc could be allocated to one of the participants.
f.
If a MOU is to be drafted at this stage endeavour to ensure that it is  

 worded so as not to close any options for later collaboration on follow-on  

 support and, that, if possible, it includes some undertaking to require  

 participants to consider prospects for collaborative support during the Staff  

 Requirement Development Phase.
g.
Advise the Operational Requirements Staff or Production authorities  

 involved of any views which have been formed about prospects for  

 collaborative support in the light of the above preliminary analysis.
6. Staff Reguirement Development Phase a.
Receive copy of Draft Staff Target and any MOU which may have been  

 signed during the Staff Target Development Phase.
b.
If not already done, establish liaison with the national member of the  

 Project Group for the equipment concerned.
c.
Consider whether and when it would be appropriate to set up a Joint  

 Steering Committee (para 5a of EUROLOG Guidelimes) and make recommendations  

 accordingly to the Project Group.
d.
Receive copies of the initial draft of systems specifications and  

 ensure that the views of consumer logistic authorities on design features  

 which will affect follow-on support arrangements eg reliability and  

 maintainability, are taken into account in the drafting of these  

 specifications.
e.
If it is decided to negotiate co-production, or licensing agreements  

 during this phase endeavour to ensure that no options for the development of  

 collaborative support are closed; this includes assessing what negotiations  

 are required over intellectual property rights.
f.
Commence planning for standardization of maintenance and supply support  

 in accordance with para 5c, d and e of the EUROLOG guidelines.
g.
Endeavour to ensure that follow-on support arrangements, particularly  

 procurement storage and distribution of spares, arrangements for maintenance  

 and repair and configuration control, are included in any MOU for the system  

 development phase which may be drafted at this stage.
7. System Development Phase a.
Receive copy of the agreed Staff Requirement and any further MOU which  

 may have been signed during the Staff Requirement Development Phase.
b.
If not already set up under 5c above, consider whether a Joint Steering  

 Committee or Joint Working Group should be set up to examine in detail the  

 possible areas, extent and types of logistic co-operation (para 5a of EUROLOG  

 Guidelines).
c.
Give support to the setting up by the project management authority of a  

 joint common configuration management system which would help to maximise the  

 benefit to be obtained from collaborative support arrangements.
d.
Continue the consideration and development of options for collaborative  

 support on which action was started under the previous phase in accordance  

 with para 5 of the EUROLOG Guidelines and in particular consider using the facilities of NAMSA or one of the participants.
8. Acquisition/Procurement Phase a.
Finalise planning for logistic follow-on support and draw up an MOU or  

 other formal document defining the co-ordinated logistic support arrangements  

 mutually agreed.
b.
Complete and implement the logistic plan prior to start of In- Service  

 Phase.
 (* 1) EUROLOG, a specialist subgroup of Eurogroup, has the following  

 membership: Belgium, Denmark, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Italy,  

 Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Turkey, United Kingdom.
