Ved eksport til New Zealand af fersk svinekød og kødprodukter med indhold  

 af svinekød skal forsendelserne være ledsaget af oprindelses- og  

 sundhedsattest, form.
K.K. 1700-1973, med følgende tilføjelse på attestens  

 bagside:
 »It is furthermore certified that:
 Brucella suis, swine fever, foot and mouth disease, swine vesicular  

 disease and African swine fever has not occurred in Denmark during the  

 previous 12 months.
 The meat or pork products were produced from pigs raised in Denmark and  

 which were not vaccinated against foot and mouth disease.
 The products are derived from pigs that have been slaughtered in the  

 previous six months.
 None of the pigs came from properties that were under restrictions for any  

 notifiable disease during the 3 months before slaughter.
 The products were derived from animals which received ante-mortem and  

 post-mortem veterinary inspection at the time of slaughter and were processed  

 in premises under the supercision of the Controlling Authority and in  

 accoordance with the European Community Regulations.
 The products are sound and fit for human consumption.
 The products were loaded under the supervision of a government inspector  

 into containers which had been cleaned and disinfected before loading.
 Sealed with official seal number: .....
 Som følge heraf skal slagteriet sikre og embedsdyrlægen stå inde for, at  

 der ikke i produktionsugen er modtaget svin fra besætninger, der inden for de  

 sidste 3 måneder har haft udbrud af Aujeszky's sygdom, samt at der om  

 nødvendigt sikres den fornødne opdeling under lagringen.
 Herudover skal bemærkes, at svinekødet skal hidrøre fra svin, der er  

 slagtet inden for de sidste 6 måneder.
Endvidere kan oplyses, at der af importører i New Zealand skal indhentes  

 importtilladelse med importbetingelserne fra Ministry of Agriculture and  

 Fisheries, P.O.
Box 2526, Wellington, New Zealand.
 Cirkulæreskrivelse af 30. september 1983 om samme emne tilbagekaldes.
 P.V.V.
