--------------------------------------------------------------------~ SCHEME FOR THE RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF TESTS AND INSPECTIONS CARRIED OUT ON SHIPS' EQUIPMENT The purpose of this Scheme is to facilitate trade in ships' equipment by  

 allowing certain tests and inspections required by a Participating Authority  

 of the importing country to be carried out by another Participating Authority  

 of the exporting country.
Explanation of terms 1. For the purpose of this Scheme:
Submission of designs and specifications 2. A person wishing to export ships' equipment or a  

 person authorized by him shall:
Approval of designs and specifications; inspections and tests (* 1) 3. The Participating Authority whose approval or  

 acceptance has been reguested shall, without undue delay, declare to the  

 Participating Authority specified in accordance with paragraph 2(b), if it so  

 finds, that the designs and specifications submitted to it are in accordance  

 with its regulations or are otherwise acceptable to it and shall at the same  

 time request the latter Participating Authority to undertake, on its behalf,  

 such of the following operations as it finds appropriate to the facilities of  

 that authority:
Reports, certificates and other documentary material 4. The reports, certificates and other documentary  

 material referred to in paragraph 3(d) shall be submitted by the  

 Participating Authority which has carried out the operations to which they  

 relate, to the Participating Authority on whose behalf they have been  

 undertaken.
Upon receipt of these reports, certificates and other documentary  

 material the latter Participating Authority shall, if satisfied, grant  

 without undue delay such final approval of the ships' equipment to which they  

 relate as is laid down in its regulations or otherwise indicate its  

 acceptance.
Refusal of final approval 5. Nothing in this Scheme shall prevent the  

 Participating Authority whose approval or acceptance has been requested from  

 refusing final approval to or acceptance of any ships' equipment tested and  

 inspected under this Scheme if it has reason to believe that such equipment  

 is not in conformity with its regulations.
Refusal of final approval or  

 acceptance and the reasons therefore shall be notified, without undue delay,  

 to the Participating Authority which has carried out the operations referred  

 to in paragraph 3 above.
Participation by other authorities Amendments 7. This Scheme may be amended by mutual agreement  

 between the Participating Authorities.
Consultations between Participating Authorities 8. Representatives of the Participating Authorities  

 shall meet from time to time to discuss matters of common interest relating  

 to the operation of this Scheme.
 9. Such meetings shall be convened by the  

 Secretary-General of EFTA whenever necessary, but at least once a year or  

 upon request in writing indicating the reason for the meeting from two or  

 more Participating Authorities in different countries.
Establishment of common requirements 10. In order to facilitate the application of this  

 Scheme Participating Authorities may establish common requirements for items  

 of ships' equipment.
11. A common requirement shall not preclude a  

 Participating Authority from having other requirements additional to the  

 provisions therein.
Common requirements may be amended by general agreement  

 of the Participating Authorities concerned.
12. A Participating Authority may at any time withdraw  

 from a common requirement by notification to the Secretary-general.
Any  

 Participating Authority wishing to withdraw shall whenever practicable give  

 reasonable notice to the other Participating Authorities of its intention to  

 do so.
The common requirement shall continue to apply as between those  

 Participating Authorities which have not withdrawn from it.
 13. The Secretary-General shall notify all  

 Participating Authorities of the common requirements as well as of any  

 amendments and withdrawals, and, from time to time, circulate a list of the  

 requirements so far issued.
Withdrawal 14. A Participating Authority may withdraw from this  

 Scheme by giving six months' notice in writing to the Secretary-General, who  

 shall notify all other Participating Authorities.
On withdrawal of a  

 Participating Authority the Secretary-General shall revise the Appendix and  

 circulate it to each Participating Authority.
--------- COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR INFLATABLE LIFE-RAFTS N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1.  REQUIREMENTS A hydrostatic release unit used in float-free arrangements shall:
 N.B.
These common requirements are to be read in connection with the text of  

 the Scheme, as revised.
Particular attention should be given to paragraph 11  

 of the Scheme.
The reader is advised to ask the relevant Participating  

 Authority if there are any national requirements additional to the provisions  

 of these common requirements.
1.  GENERAL 4.  ATTACHMENTS An inflatable work vest may have a  

 buoyant grab line attached with a simple handhold.
The line shall have a  

 length of not less than 1 m and a breaking strength of at least 1.5 kN.
5.  MEANS FOR DETECTION 6.  MARKING ARRANGEMENTS An inflatable work vest shall  

 be clearly and permanently marked with the temperature range for which it has  

 been tested, the name of the manufacturer or his trade mark, the name under  

 which the vest is sold, the year of manufacture, and a mark showing by which  

 Participating Authority it has been approved.
A panel or other means on which  

 can be marked the date and location of each inspection and servicing shall be  

 attached in the vest.
7.  PACKING It shall be possible to pack an inflatable  

 work vest in the protective cover without restricting inflation of the  

 buoyancy chambers.
The packing shall be such that: - the work vest has as few  

 folds as practicable, - all hard components which could damage the vest are  

 placed in such a manner that the risk of wear during stowage and use of the  

 work vest is minimized, - all hard components of the vest are protected by  

 suitable shock absorbant material, and - the protective cover can be easily  

 examined for external damage, and can be readily opened and closed for  

 examination of the vest.
8.  INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE AND INSPECTION 9.  PERFORMANCE TESTS The tests shall be carried out  

 with at least six persons of the following heights and weights:
10.  PRODUCTION TESTS Each work vest should be proof  

 tested by inflation to a pressure of 20.5 kPa for 1 minute.
This should be  

 followed by an airholding test at a pressure of 5 kPa for 15 minutes.
 11.  OTHER TESTS Other methods of testing the  

 materials etc. will be accepted if it is proved to the satisfaction of the  

 Participating Authority that the test results correspond to the requirements  

 laid down.
 12.  RESERVATION AS TO APPROVAL Notwithstanding an  

 inflatable work vest or the materials incorporated satisfying the  

 requirements laid down in these common requirements, the Participating  

 Authority may reject a work vest when it is found unfit for its purpose.
--------- (* 1) Interpretation of Article 3 (agreed at the 15th Meeting of the  

 Participating Authorities on 18 and 19 September 1985) 1. Article 3 of the Scheme for the reciprocal recognition of tests and  

 inspections carried out on ships' equipment shall be interpreted as meaning  

 that one Participating Authority shall examine designs and specifications for  

 ships' equipment included in the Scheme submitted by another Participating  

 Authority for approval or acceptance as meeting its national requirements.
 2. Consideration shall be given to the use of the facilities of the  

 Applying Authority to carry out inspections and tests where appropriate.
 3. The approval or acceptance of items of ships' equipment in this way  

 will have the effect that such equipment is acceptable for use on the ships  

 of the Approving or Accepting Authority.
 4. Approval or acceptance does not depend upon a particular ship or  

 contract reguiring that equipment but is general.
