A THE ASSEMBLY, RECALLING Article 16 of the Convention on the Inter-Governmental Maritime  

 Consultative Organization, RECOGNIZING that Regulation 60 of Chapter II-2 of the 1978 Protocol  

 relating to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974,  

 requires new and existing chemical tankers of a certain size, when carrying  

 petroleum products, to be fitted with a fixed inert gas system at specific  

 dates, RECOGNIZING ALSO that such ships by the same Regulation are required to  

 have a fixed inert gas system when carrying other liquid products having a  

 similar fire hazard, RECOGNIZING FURTHER the unique feature of parcel chemical tankers  

 requiring separation of cargo piping and of vent piping due to the wide  

 spectrum of chemicals carried, RECOGNIZING FURTHER the stringent purity levels required by certain  

 chemicals and compatibility and reactivity problems related to a wide range  

 of chemicals, HAVING CONSIDERED the recommendation made by the Maritime Safety Committee  

 at its forty-fourth session, 1. ADOPTS the Interim Regulation for Inert Gas Systems  

 on Chemical Tankers Carrying Petroleum Products, set out in the Annex to this  

 resolution; 2. URGES Governments concerned, under the provisions  

 of Regulation 5 of Chapter I of the International Convention for the Safety  

 of Life at Sea, 1974, to apply to chemical tankers as appropriate the Interim  

 Regulation as equivalent to Regulation 62 of Chapter II-2 of the 1974 SOLAS  

 Convention under Regulation 60 of the 1978 Protocol with respect to inert gas  

 systems; 3. REQUESTS Governments to inform IMCO as soon as  

 possible on measures taken to implement this Interim Regulation.
B THE ASSEMBLY, HAVING ADOPTED the Interim Regulation for Inert Gas Systems on Chemical  

 Tankers Carrying Petroleum Products, RECOGNIZING that the Interim Regulation has been developed for the  

 inerting of cargo tanks on chemical tankers containing petroleum products, 1. URGES the Maritime Safety Committee as a long-term  

 goal to investigate a possible extension of the Interim Regulation to the  

 inerting of cargo tanks containing other flammable liquids, and to  

 investigate other alternatives for achieving equivalent protection against  

 fire or explosion or both to that required by Regulation 60 of Chapter II-2  

 of the 1978 Protocol relating to the 1974 SOLAS Convention of ships carrying  

 flammable cargoes, and as a result of these investigations, to develop final  

 requirements for chemical tankers and gas carriers; 2. AGREES that compliance with additional provisions  

 which will be contained in the final requirements should not be required to  

 be applied to ships the keel of which is laid before the date of coming into  

 force of the final requirements.
ANNEX INTERIM REGULATION FOR INERT GAS SYSTEMS ON CHEMICAL TANKERS CARRYING PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PREAMBLE Administrations are invited to accept the inert gas systems referred to in  

 this Regulation for chemical tankers for which certificates of fitness are  

 issued under the Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying  

 Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk (resolution A.212(VII)). Inert gas systems  

 supplied by one or more oil-fired inert gas generators may be accepted.
An  

 Administration may accept systems using inert gases from other sources  

 provided that an equivalent standard of safety is achieved.
 This Regulation relates to the carriage in chemical tankers of petroleum  

 products which include crude oil, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse and refined  

 products (other than petrochemicals which are subject to the provisions of  

 Annex II of the 1973 MARPOL Convention) and, without limiting the generality  

 of the foregoing, include the substances listed in Appendix I to Annex I of  

 the 1973 MARPOL Convention having a flashpoint not exceeding 60 degrees C as  

 determined by an approved flashpoint apparatus and whose Reid vapour pressure  

 is below atmospheric pressure except when such tanks are cleaned, gas freed  

 and maintained in the gas free condition.
 The application dates stipulated in Chapter II-2 of the 1978 SOLAS  

 Protocol apply to chemical tankers covered by this Regulation.
INTERIM REGULATION 1 Inert gas generator systems(* 1) shall be designed, constructed and  

 tested to the satisfaction of the Administration.
They shall be designed and  

 operated so as to render and maintain the atmosphere of cargo tanks(* 2)  

 non-flammable at all times when such tanks are used for the carriage of  

 petroleum products as defined above.
 2 The systems shall be capable of:
.1 inerting empty cargo tanks by reducing the oxygen content of the  

 atmosphere in each tank to a level at which combustion cannot be supported; .2 maintaining the atmosphere in all parts of each cargo tank designated  

 to carry flammable products requiring protection by an inert gas system with  

 an oxygen content not exceeding 8 per cent by volume and at a positive  

 pressure at all times in port and at sea except when it is necessary for such  

 a tank to be gas free; .3 eliminating the need for air to enter a tank during normal operations  

 except when it is necessary for such a tank to be gas free; .4 purging empty cargo tanks of flammable vapour, so that subsequent gas  

 freeing operations will at no time create a flammable atmosphere within the  

 tank.
3.1 The systems shall be capable of delivering inert gas to the cargo  

 tanks at a rate of at least 125 per cent of the maximum rate of discharge  

 capacity of the ship expressed as a volume.
An Administration may accept  

 inert gas systems having a lower delivery capacity provided that the maximum  

 rate of discharge of cargoes from cargo tanks being protected by the system  

 is restricted to 80 per cent of the inert gas capacity.
 3.2 The systems shall be capable of delivering inert gas with an oxygen  

 content of not more than 5 per cent by volume in the inert gas supply main to  

 the cargo tanks at any required rate of flow.
 4.1 Suitable fuel in sufficient quantity shall be provided for the inert  

 gas generators.
4.2 The inert gas generators shall be located outside the cargo tank area  

 as defined in the Bulk Chemical Code.
Spaces containing inert gas generators  

 should have no direct access to accommodation, service or control station  

 spaces, but may be located in machinery spaces.
If they are not located in  

 machinery spaces they shall be located in a compartment reserved solely for  

 their use.
Such a compartment shall be separated by a gastight steel bulkhead  

 and/or deck from accommodation, service and control station spaces as defined  

 in the Bulk Chemical Code.
Adequate positive pressure type mechanical  

 ventilation shall be provided for such a compartment.
Access to such  

 compartments located aft shall be only from an open deck outside the cargo  

 tank area.
Access shall be located on the end bulkhead not facing the cargo  

 area and/or on the outboard side of the superstructure or deckhouse at a  

 distance of at least 25 per cent of the length of the ship but not less than  

 5 m from the end of the superstructure or deckhouse facing the cargo area.
In  

 the case of such a compartment being located in the forecastle, access shall  

 be through the deckhead forward of the cargo area.
 4.3 Inert gas piping systems shall not pass through accommodation, service  

 and control station spaces.
5.1 Means shall be provided which will effectively cool the volume of gas  

 specified in paragraph 3 and remove solids and sulphur combustion products.  

 The cooling water arrangements shall be such that an adequate supply of water  

 will always be available without interfering with any essential services on  

 the ship.
Provision shall also be made for alternative supply of cooling  

 water.
 5.2 Filters or equivalent devices shall be fitted to minimize the amount  

 of water carried over to the inert gas main.
 6.1 Two air blowers shall be fitted to each inert gas generator, which  

 together shall be capable of delivering to the cargo tanks, required to be  

 protected by the system, at least the volume of gas required by paragraph 3.  

 An Administration may permit only one blower if it is capable of delivering  

 to the protected cargo tanks the total volume of gas required by paragraph 3,  

 provided that sufficient spares for the air blower and its prime mover are  

 carried on board to enable any failure of the air blower and its prime mover  

 to be rectified.
 6.2 The inert gas systems shall be so designed that the maximum pressure  

 which they can exert on any cargo tank will not exceed the test pressure of  

 any cargo tank.
 6.3 Where more than one inert gas generator is provided suitable shut-off  

 arrangements shall be provided on the discharge outlet of each generator  

 plant.
 6.4 Arrangements shall be made to vent the inert gas to the atmosphere in  

 case the inert gas produced is off-specification, e.g. during starting-up or  

 in case of equipment failure.
 6.5 Where inert gas generators are served by positive displacement blowers  

 a pressure relief device shall be provided to prevent excess pressure being  

 developed on the discharge side of the blower.
7 Two fuel oil shall be fitted to each inert gas generator.
An  

 Administration may permit only one fuel oil pump on condition that sufficient  

 spares for the fuel oil pump and its prime mover are carried on board to  

 enable any failure of the fuel oil pump and its prime mover to be rectified  

 by the ship's crew.
 8 A gas regulating valve shall be fitted in the inert gas supply main.  

 This valve shall be automatically controlled to close as required in  

 paragraphs 17.2 and 17.3. It shall also be capable of automatically  

 regulating the flow of inert gas to the cargo tanks unless other means are  

 provided to automatically control the inert gas flow rate.
9.1 At least two non-return devices, one of which shall be a water seal,  

 shall be fitted in the inert gas supply main in order to prevent the return  

 of flammable vapour to the inert gas generator and to any gas-safe space  

 under all normal conditions of trim, list and motion of the ship.
They shall  

 be located between the automatic valve required by paragraph 8 and the first  

 connexion to any cargo tank or cargo pipeline.
An Administration may permit  

 an alternative arrangement or device providing a measure of safety equivalent  

 to that of a water seal.
 9.2 The devices referred to in paragraph 9.1 shall be located in the cargo  

 tank area to deck.
 9.3 The water seal referred to in paragraph 9.1 shall be capable of being  

 supplied by two separate pumps, each of which shall be capable of mainting an  

 adequate supply at all times.
 9.4 The arrangement of the water seal and its associated provisions shall  

 be such that it will prevent backflow of flammable vapours and will ensure  

 the proper functioning of the water seal under operating conditions.
 9.5 Provision shall be made to ensure that any water seal is protected  

 against freezing, in such a way that the integrity of water seal is not  

 impaired by overheating.
 9.6 A water loop or other approved arrangements shall also be fitted to  

 all associated water supply and drain piping and to all venting or pressure  

 sensing piping leading to gas-safe spaces.(* 3) Means shall be provided to  

 prevent such loops from being emptied by vacuum.
 9.7 Any water seal or equivalent device and all loop arrangements shall be  

 capable of preventing the return of flammable vapours to an inert gas  

 generator at a pressure equal to the test pressure of the cargo tanks.
9.8 The second device shall be a non-return valve or equivalent capable of  

 preventing the return of vapours or liquids or both and fitted between the  

 water seal (or the equivalent device) required in paragraph 9.1 and the first  

 connexion from the inert gas main to a cargo tank.
It shall be provided with  

 positive means of closure.
As an alternative to positive means of closure, an  

 additional valve having such means of closure may be provided between the  

 non-return valve and the first connexion to the cargo tanks to isolate the  

 water seal (or equivalent device).
 9.9 As an additional safeguard against the possible leakage of flammable  

 liquids or vapours back from the deck main, means shall be provided to permit  

 this section of the line between the valve having positive means of closure  

 referred to in paragraph 9.8 and the valve referred to in paragraph 8 to be  

 vented in a safe manner when the first of these valves is closed.
 10.1 The inert gas main may be divided into two or more branches between  

 the non-return devices required by paragraph 9 and the cargo tanks.
10.2 Inert gas supply mains shall be fitted with branch piping leading to  

 each cargo tank designated for the carriage of flammable products required to  

 be inerted by this Regulation.
Each cargo tank containing or loading products  

 not required to be inerted shall be separated from the inert gas main by:
.1 removing spool pieces, valves or other pipe sections, and blanking the  

 pipe ends; or .2 arrangement of two spectacle flanges in series with provisions for  

 detecting leakage into the pipe between the two spectacle flanges.
 10.3 Means shall be provided to protect cargo tanks against the effect of  

 overpressure or vacuum caused by termal variations when the cargo tanks are  

 isolated from the inert gas mains.
 10.4 Piping systems shall be so designed as to prevent the accumulation of  

 cargo or water in the pipelines under all normal conditions.
 10.5 Suitable arrangements shall be provided to enable the inert gas main  

 to be connected to an external supply of inert gas.
11 Unless the arrangements for venting of all vapours displaced from the  

 cargo tanks during loading and ballasting comply with the requirements of the  

 Bulk Chemical Code for controlled venting, such arrangements shall comply  

 with Regulation 58(a) of Chapter II-2 SOLAS 1974 and shall consists either of  

 one or more mast risers or a number of high velocity vents.
The inert gas  

 supply mains shall not be used for such venting.
 12.1 The arrangements for inerting, purging or gas freeing of empty tanks  

 as required in paragraph 2 shall be to the satisfaction of the Administration  

 and shall be such that the accumulation of flammable vapours in pockets  

 formed by the internal structural members in a tank is minimized.
 12.2 When in accordance with paragraph 3 and Administration permits a  

 system designed to supply only one or two tanks simultaneously, the outlet  

 pipes should be sized such that an exit velocity in the outlet pipes of 20  

 m/s can be maintained.
 13 Means shall be provided for continuously indicating the temperature and  

 pressure of the inert gas at the discharge side of the system, whenever it is  

 operating.
 14.1 Instrumentation shall be fitted for continuously indicating and  

 permanently recording, when the inert gas is being supplied:
.1 the pressure of the inert gas supply mains between the non-return  

 devices required by paragraph 9.1 and the cargo tanks; and .2 the oxygen content of the inert gas in the inert gas supply main.
14.2 The devices referred to in paragraph 14.1 shall be placed in the  

 cargo control room where provided.
Where no cargo control room is provided,  

 they shall be placed in a position easily accessible to the officer in charge  

 of cargo operations.
 14.3 In addition, meters shall be fitted:
.1 In the navigating bridge to indicate at all times the pressure referred  

 to in paragraph 14.1.1; and .2 in the machinery control room or in the machinery space to indicate the  

 oxygen content referred to in paragraph 14.1.2.
15 Portable instruments for measuring oxygen and flammable vapour  

 concentration shall be provided.
In addition, suitable arrangement shall be  

 made on each cargo tank such that the condition of the tank atmosphere can be  

 determined using these portable instruments.
 16 Suitable means shall be provided for the zero and span calibration of  

 both fixed and portable gas concentration measurements instruments, referred  

 to in paragraphs 14 and 15.
 17.1 Audible and visual alarms shall be provided to indicate:
.1 low water pressure or low water flow rate to the cooling and scrubbing  

 arrangement referred to in paragraph 5.1; .2 low fuel supply; .3 high gas temperature as referred to in paragraph 13; .4 failure of the power supply to the inert gas generators; .5 oxygen content in excess of 8 per cent by volume as referred to in  

 paragraph 14.1.2; .6 failure of the power supply to the indicating devices as referred to in  

 paragraph 14.1 and to the automatic control systems for the gas regulating  

 valve referred to in paragraph 8 and the inert gas generator; .7 low water level in the water seal as referred to in paragraph 9.1; .8 gas pressure less than 100 mm water gauge as referred to in paragraph  

 14.1; .9 high gas pressure as referred to in paragraph 14.1.1.
 17.2 Automatic shut-down of the gas regulating valve and of the fuel oil  

 supply to the inert gas generator shall be arranged on predetermined limits  

 being reached in respect of paragraphs 17.1.1 and 17.1.3.
 17.3 Automatic shut-down of the gas regulating valve shall be arranged in  

 respect of paragraph 17.1.4.
17.4 In respect of paragraph 17.1.5, when the oxygen content in the inert  

 gas exceeds 8 per cent by volume, immediate action shall be taken to improve  

 the gas quality.
Unless the quality of the inert gas improves, all operations  

 in those tanks to which inert gas is being supplied shall be suspended so as  

 to avoid air being drawn into the tanks.
The deck isolation valve referred to  

 in paragraph 9.8 shall be closed and the off-specification gas shall be  

 vented to atmosphere.
17.5 The alarms required in paragraphs 17.1.5, 17.1.6 and 17.1.8 shall be  

 fitted in the machinery space and cargo control room, where provided, but in  

 each case in such a position that they are immediately received by  

 responsible members of the crew.
All other alarms required by this paragraph  

 shall be audible to responsible members of the crew either as individual  

 alarms or as a group alarm.
17.6 In respect of paragraph 17.1.7 the Administration shall be satisfied  

 as to the maintenance of an adequate reserve of water at all times and the  

 integrity of the arrangements to permit the automatic formation of the water  

 seal when the gas flow ceases.
The audible and visual alarm on the lowel of  

 the water in the water seal shall operate when the inert gas is not being  

 supplied.
 17.7 An audible alarm system independent of that required in paragraph  

 17.1.8 or automatic shut-down of cargo pumps shall be provided to operate on  

 predetermined limits of low pressure in the inert gas mains being reached.
18 Detailed instruction manuals shall be provided on board, covering the  

 operations, safety and maintenance requirements and occupational health  

 hazards relevant to the inert gas system and its application to the cargo  

 tank system.
The manuals shall include guidance on procedures to be followed  

 in the event of a fault or failure of the inert gas system.
 (* 1) »Inert gas generator system« means the machinery dedicated  

 to the production and supply of inert gas and includes the air blowers,  

 combustion chambers, oil fuel pumps and burners, gas coolers/scrubbers and  

 automatic combustion control and supervisory equipment, e.g. flame failure  

 devices.
 (* 2) Throughout this Regulation the term »cargo tank« includes  

 also »slop tanks containing oil residues«.
 (* 3) Gas-safe space is a space in which the entry of hydrocarbon gases  

 would produce hazards with regard to flammability or toxicity.
