 Til samtlige til eksport af fersk kød og kødvarer autoriserede  

 virksomheder samt dyrlægerne ved disse.
 1. Godkendelse af et kvalitetskontrolprogram .
En række kødvarer, der er beregnet for eksport til USA, skal tilvirkes  

 under et kvalitetskontrol (QC) program, godkendt af FSIS.
Når godkendelsen er  

 givet, er veterinærdirektoratet ansvarlig for iværksættelsen og overvågningen  

 af, at virksomheden overholder det godkendte program til sikring af, at  

 kødvarerne opfylder de specielle angivelser på etiketten.
 Fra USDA, Washington, har man modtaget meddelelse om, at der skal anvendes  

 følgende fremgangsmåde for godkendelse af et kvalitetskontrolprogram.
A.
Virksomheden fremsender sit forslag til kvalitetskontrolprogram sammen  

 med etiketten for kødvaren til veterinærdirektoratet.
 Såfremt programmet kan accepteres, sender veterinærdirektoratet forslaget  

 til Foreign Programs Division, International Programs, Food Safety and  

 Inspection Service, Washington, bilagt veterinærdirektoratets kontrolregler  

 for programmet.
B.
Foreign Programs Division bekræfter veterinærdirektoratets evne til at  

 kontrollere det foreslåede kvalitetskontrolprogram og sender det til  

 Processed Products Inspection og til Standards and Labels Division, Meat and  

 Poultry Inspection Technical Services, FSIS, til godkendelse.
C.
Når et kvalitetskontrolprogram er godkendt eller forkastet, vil  

 virksomheden blive underrettet herom gennem veterinærdirektoratet.
 Der henvises til vedlagte bilag 1 af 26. marts 1984 (K.K. 426- 1984),  

 Kontrolregler for kødvarer mærket med oplysning om natriumindhold og bilag 2  

 af 26. marts 1984 (K.K. 426-1984), Mindstekrav for kødvarer, mærket med  

 oplysning om fedtindhold.
 Endvidere vedlægges Policy Memo 049B (Interim Sodium Labeling Guidelines).
Foranstående regler er trådt i kraft.
Ansøgning (på engelsk) med bilag om  

 godkendelse af et kvalitetskontrolprogram skal derfor fremover fremsendes af  

 virksomheden og med veterinærkontrollens påtegning til Veterinærdirektoratets  

 Laboratorium.
 Såfremt det kan accepteres, videresendes det af veterinærdirektoratet til  

 Food Safety and Inspection Service, Washington.
 2. Kontrollen af et godkendt kvalitetskontrolprogram .
 Kvalitetskontrolprogrammet skal ledes af en af virksomheden udpeget  

 person, og den laboratoriemæssige undersøgelse foretages på virksomhedens  

 laboratorium.
 Virksomheden skal indføre resultaterne af undersøgelserne i en protokol  

 med oplysning om partinummer, produktionsdato eller lignende til  

 identifikation af de undersøgte partier.
 Protokollen skal være tilgængelig for den kontrollerende dyrlæge.
 Prøver til verifikation af virksomhedens laboratorieresultater skal  

 indsendes af virksomheden til Veterinærdirektoratets Laboratorium i henhold  

 til den for den pågældende anprisning gældende plan (jf. nedenfor). Planen  

 kan for den enkelte virksomhed eller det enkelte produkt ændres af  

 Veterinærdirektoratets Laboratorium.
Virksomheden skal i protokollen indføre oplysning om prøver indsendt til  

 verifikation.
Veterinærdirektoratets Laboratorium giver skriftlig meddelelse  

 til virksomheden med kopi til den kontrollerende dyrlæge om alle  

 verifikationsresultater.
Virksomheden skal indføre disse resultater i  

 protokollen.
 Alle udgifter vedrørende verifikationsanalyser afholdes af virksomheden.
 Det påhviler den kontrollerende dyrlæge at påse overholdelsen af det  

 godkendte program.
Den kontrollerende dyrlæge skal kontrollere, at prøveudtagningsplanen  

 følges, og at resultaterne opfylder kravene samt at oplysninger vedrørende  

 verifikationsprøver indføres, og at disse svarer til virksomhedens  

 analyseresultater.
Efter hver kontrol skal dyrlægen med dato og underskrift i  

 protokollen angive, hvornår den er efterset.
 Den kontrollerende dyrlæger indsender ved udgangen af hvert kvartal  

 fotokopi af de sider i protokollen, som vedrører det pågældende kvartal.
 Indsendelse af prøver til verifikation på Veterinærdirektoratets  

 Laboratorium.
 1. Natrium .
 2. Fedt .
 Af hvert 10. parti udtages en prøve, som sendes til kontrolanalyse på  

 Veterinærdirektoratets Laboratorium.
 P.V.V.
K.
Hermansen K.K. 426-1984 26. marts 1984 Bilag 1.
USA - KVALITETSKONTROLPROGRAM Kontrolkriterier for kødvarer mærket med oplysning om natriumindhold.
Analyserne skal udføres i overensstemmelse med »Official Methods of  

 Analysis of the Association of Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC)»  

 eller med »Chemistry Laboratory Guidebook« of the U.S.
Department  

 of Agriculture; alternative metoder kan dog benyttes hvis proceduren  

 fremsendes til de amerikanske myndigheder og findes acceptabel.
 Bilag 2.
USA - KVALITETSKONTROLPROGRAM Mindstekrav for kødvarer, mærket med oplysning om fedtindhold.
 Derudover skal ansøgningen indeholde oplysning om følgende (punkterne  

 2-6).
United States Department of Agriculture Food Safety and Inspection Service POLICY MEMO 049B Branch Chiefs, SLD From: Robert G.
Hibbert, Director, SLD Subject: Interim Sodium Labeling Guidelines AUG 19 1982 ISSUES: What guidelines should be followed at the present time in the  

 review and approval of labeling which includes quantitative sodium  

 information and/or non-quantitative claims? POLICY: 1. The label of any meat or poultry product may bear quantitative  

 information on the amount of sodium in a serving of the product.
When this  

 information is provided, the serving size must appear on the label and must  

 be within the range of serving sizes customarily used for that product.  

 Sodium content information may be included without other nutrition  

 information.
2. Quantitative information on sodium content shall be  

 declared in terms of milligrams per serving of the product.
The number of  

 milligrams shall be declared to the nearest 5-milligram increment.
If the  

 serving contain s 5 milligrams or less, the label may bear an appropriate  

 statement to that effect or declare the sodium content rounded to the nearest  

 5-milligram increment.
 3. When a claim is made about the sodium and/or salt  

 content of a meat or poultry product, the label of that product must bear  

 quantitative information on the sodium content' in a serving of the product.
4. Nutrition labeling does not require the inclusion  

 of sodium content information.
However, if sodium content information is  

 included on the nutrition information panel of a meat or poultry product, the  

 sodium contenti nformation must immediately follow the information on fat  

 content (or, if provided, any information on fatty acid and/or cholesterol  

 content).
 5. Low sodium' and similar terms may be applied only  

 to products that contain 35 mg or less of sodium per 100 grams of product.
 6. Unsalted' or »no salt added« or  

 »without added salt« or an equivalent term may be applied to foods  

 only if: (a) the food contains no ingredient that contains salt (sodium  

 chloride) or salt that has been added during processing, (b) the food that it  

 resembles and for which it substitutes is normally processed with salt.
7. A. comparative sodium content claim may not be made  

 unless a product's sodium content is at least 25 percent less than that of  

 the appropriate food(s) with which it is compared and unless that comparative  

 claim is accompanied by (in close proximity to the claim) identification of  

 the food(s) with which the comparison is being made and a quantitative  

 statement of the relative or abosolute difference in sodium content per  

 serving (using equal serving sizes) of the foods being compared.
Example:  

 »This bologna has 25 percent less sodium per serving than our regular  

 bologna« or »This bologna contains 125 mg less sodium per serving  

 than the three leading brands of bologna.« (The label of a product with  

 a comparative claim must bear, in addition to the comparative statement, -  

 quantitative information on the sodium content in a serving of the product as  

 provided for in (*3) above.) 8. When labels bearing sodium content information are  

 submitted for approval, appropriate information should also be submitted to  

 support the label declaration.
Acceptable information would be:
 With respect to (a) and (b) above, it may also be necessary that  

 laboratory analyses be performed to assure, the adequacy of the calculations  

 and the applicability of the reference sources.
9. Processors are responsible for assuring the  

 accuracy of the sodium content of their products.
The basis for verifying  

 sodium content will be as follows:
A.
An approved quality control program will not be required for products  

 where an adequate basis exists (i.e., a standard reference such as USDA  

 Handbook 8 and its revised successors, or other reli able data sources), or  

 there is information that demonstrates that calculations from the sodium  

 content of the product's - individual ingredients adequately reflect the  

 sodium content of the product, or there is a data base consisting of a  

 sufficient number of analyses to establish the variability and showing that  

 the standard deviation does not exceed 25 percent of the average.
It should be noted that the Program will be collecting data on certain  

 products on an ongoing basis.
If such data eventually indicate that any  

 labeling content value for a product which was based on a standard reference  

 is invalid (because it may have been based only on a very few analyses), the  

 labeling content value will require change.
B.
An approved Partial Quality Control (PQC) program will be required for  

 products not covered in A above to verify the accuracy of any sodium labeling  

 value.
Such a PQC program may be principally formulation control coupled with  

 an occasional laboratory analysis, only laboratory analysis of finished  

 products, or some combination of the two.
When laboratory analysis alone is  

 relied on for verification, sampling frequency will depend on the correlation  

 of the laboratory results to the sodium value on the labeling.
Processors with approved labelng for products that may fall under Item A  

 above may be resubmitted to the Standards and Labeling Division along with  

 the supporting information for reevaluation.
Processors with approved quality  

 control (QC) programs for products that fall under Item B above may want to  

 revise the QC program and submit it for reevaluation to the Processed Product  

 Inspection Division.
 The verification procedures specified in item 9 above are also specified  

 in MPI Bulletin 82-28- dated May 13, 1982.
RATIONALE: Since the rescindment of Policy Memo 049, the Division has had  

 no published guidelines for processors to follow in providing sodium  

 information on the labels for their products.
To facilitate sodium labeling,  

 these interim guidelines are being issued to provide processors with  

 information on our current sodium labeling policy and to eliminate the  

 confusion which followed the rescindment of Policy Memo 049.
These guidelines specify definitions and methods to assure that  

 quantitative sodium content information is provided in a consistent manner  

 that will be meaningful to the consumer.
They also permit the use of  

 non-quantitative label statements about sodium content, referred to as  

 »claim,» as long as such »claims« are accompanied by  

 quantitative sodium content information.
While we are not encouraging the use  

 of sodium »claims,» we recognize the value of these claims as  

 competitive marketing devices and as an aid to the consumer in spotting  

 products that contain sodium content information, and hope that permitting  

 such »claims« will result in an increasing number of processors who  

 will provide sodium information and who will consider reducing the sodium in  

 their products.
The guidelines outlined in this policy are, for the most part, long  

 standing policies of the Division.
Despite their long standing, however, the  

 guidelines are being issued on an interim basis so that producers can proceed  

 as soon as possible to provide sodium content information on their meat and  

 poultry labels.
Final sodium labeling policy guidelines will be issued when  

 more information is gathered through our efforts, through the rulemaking  

 efforts of the FDA, and from additional consumer and industry input.
