FOREWORD For more than 100 years cargoes such as grain and coal have been shipped  

 in bulk.
However, in recent years there has been a marked development in the  

 variety of bulk cargoes carried by sea and they now constitute a significant  

 proportion of international seaborne trade.
Milliones of tonnes of these cargoes - coals, concentrates, grains,  

 fertilizers, animal foodstuffs, minerals and ores - are shipped in bulk every  

 year across the oceans of the world.
While the vast majority of these  

 shipments are made without incident there have unfortunately been a number of  

 serious casualties which resulted not only in the loss of the ship but also  

 in loss of life.
The problems involved in the carriage of bulk cargoes were recognized by  

 the delegates to the 1960 International Conference on Safety of Life at Sea  

 but at that time it was not possible to frame detailed requirements except  

 for the carriage of grain cargoes.
The Conference did recommend, however, in  

 paragraph 55 of Annex D to the Convention, that an internationally acceptable  

 code of safe practice for the shipment of bulk cargoes should be drawn up  

 under the sponsorship of the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative  

 Organization (IMCO).
This work was undertaken by the Organization's Sub-Committee on Containers  

 and Cargoes and four editions of the Code have been produced, the first one  

 appearing in 1965. The Code is a recommended guide for the Administrations,  

 shipowners, shippers and masters on the standards to be applied in the safe  

 stowage and shipment of solid bulk cargoes excluding grain which is dealt  

 with under separate rules.
The Code includes general advice on the procedures  

 to be followed whenever bulk cargoes are to be shipped, a description of the  

 hazards associated with certain cargoes, lists of typical products currently  

 shipped in bulk and details of recommended test procedures to determine  

 various characteristics of bulk cargo materials.
 It should be carefully noted, however, that the list of products appearing  

 in Appendices A, B and C to the Code is by no means exhaustive and the  

 physical properties attributed to them are intended only for guidance.  

 Consequently, before loading any bulk cargo it is essential to ascertain -  

 normally from the shipper - the current physical and chemical properties of  

 the cargo.
 Since valuable information leading to improvements in this Code may be  

 obtained from voyage reports it is recommended that masters should be  

 encouraged to notify their Administrations of the behaviour of various types  

 of bulk cargoes and, in particular, to report the circumstances of any  

 incidents involving such cargoes.
CONTENTS Foreword Introduction Section 1 - Definitions Section 2 - General precautions Cargo distribution Loading and unloading Section 3 - Trimming procedures Bulk cargoes having an angle of repose less than or equal to 35 degrees Bulk cargoes having an angle of repose greater than 35 degrees Section 4 - Safety of personnel General requirements Poisoning and asphyxiation hazards Health hazards due to dust Flammable(* 1) atmosphere Ventilation systems Section 5 - Methods of determining the angle of repose Section 6 - Cargoes which may liquefy Properties, characteristics and hazards Precautions Section 7 - The assessment of acceptability of consignments for safe  

 shipment The provision of information Certificates of test Sampling procedures Frequency of sampling and testing for »flow moisture point« and  

 »moisture content« determination Standardized sampling procedures Section 8 - Cargoes which may liquefy: test procedures Section 9 - Materials possessing chemical hazards: description of hazards General Classes of hazard Materials hazardous only in bulk (MHB) Section 10 - Materials possessing chemical hazards Identification Segregation Cargo distribution and trimming Segregation table to be used when loading bulk cargoes possessing chemical  

 hazards and explosives in packaged form Section 11 - Stowage factor conversion tables Appendix A - List of cargoes which may liquefy A.1 General A.2 Mineral concentrates A.3 Other materials Appendix B - List of bulk materials possessing chemical hazards Appendix C - List of bulk cargoes which are neither liable to liquefy  

 (Appendix A) nor possess chemical hazards (Appendix B) Appendix D - Laboratory test procedures, associated apparatures and  

 standards D.1 Test procedures for cargoes which may liquefy and associated apparatus D.2 Test procedures to determine the angle of repose and associated  

 apparatus D.3 Standards used in test procedures D.4 Trough test for determination of the self-sustaining exothermic  

 decomposition of fertilizers containing nitrates Appendix E - Index of materials INTRODUCTION 1 The primary aim of this Code is to promote the safe stowage and shipment  

 of bulk cargoes by:
.1 highlighting the dangers associated with the shipment of certain types  

 of bulk cargoes; .2 giving guidance on the procedures to be adopted when the shipment of  

 bulk cargoes is contemplated; .3 listing typical products currently shipped in bulk together with advice  

 on their properties and handling; and .4 describing test procedures to be employed to determine various  

 characteristics of the bulk cargo materials.
 2 Definitions of the terms used throughout the Code are given in Section  

 1.
 3 In general the hazards associated with the shipment of bulk cargoes may  

 be considered as falling into the following categories:
.1 Structural damage due to improper distribution of the cargo Advice on this subject will be found in Section 2 and Appendix C.
.2 Loss or reduction of stability during a voyage This usually results from:
.2.1 A shift of cargo in heavy weather due to the cargo having been  

 inadequately trimmed or improperly distributed; (Advice on this subject will be found in Sections 2, 3 and 5 and in  

 Appendices C and D.2) .2.2 Cargoes liquefying under the stimulus of vibration and motion of a  

 ship in a seaway and then sliding or flowing to one side of the cargo hold.  

 Such cargoes are normally finely grained materials, including fine coal,  

 whice are shipped in a damp condition; (Advice on this subject will be found in Section 6 and 8 and Appendices A  

 and D.1) .3 Chemical reactions (e.g. emission of toxic or explosive gases,  

 spontaneous combustion or severe corrosive effects).
 Advice on these subjects will be found in Sections 4, 9 and 10 and  

 Appendices B and D.4.
4 Unless the physical and/or chemical properties of the material presented  

 for shipment are available it will be difficult to determine what  

 precautions, if any, should be taken to ensure safe shipment.
It is therefore  

 essential that the shipper should provide adequate information about the  

 cargo to be shipped.
Advice on this subject will be found in Section 7.
 5 The need for all personnel involved to exercise great care in  

 preparation for and during loading or unloading bulk cargoes and in  

 particular when entering spaces which may be deficient in oxygen, or which  

 may contain toxic gases, is given special mention in Section 4.
6 Lists of typical products currently shipped in bulk, together with  

 advice on their properties and methods of handling, are given in Appendices  

 A, B and C.
It is emphasized however that these lists are not exhaustive and  

 that the properties attributed to the products are given only for guidance.  

 Consequently, before loading it is essential to obtain currently valid  

 information on the physical and chemical properties of the products presented  

 for shipment.
 7 Details of three test procedures together with advice on methods of  

 sampling to obtain representative samples for test purposes are given in  

 Appendix D.
 8 The three laboratory test procedures described are used for determining  

 the following:
.1 the moisture content, flow moisture point and transportable moisture  

 limit of materials which may liquefy; .2 the angle of repose of granular materials; .3 the self-sustaining exothermic decomposition of fertilizers containing  

 nitrates (the trough test).
9 It is strongly recommended that these tests are conducted only by  

 suitable trained personnel.
In the cases of 8.1 and 8.2 above, auxiliary  

 check tests which may be employed by the ship's personnel are described.  

 These tests should only be employed in circumstances where the master doubts  

 whether the condition of the cargo is such as to ensure safe shipment.
10 An index listing all the materials mentioned in the Code and indicating  

 the appropriate Appendix in which further information will be found is given  

 in Appendix E.
Again, it is emphasized that this list of products is not  

 exhaustive.
N.B.
If a cargo not listed in this Code is offered for bulk carriage the  

 master should consult the appropriate competent authority for further  

 information.
Section 1 - Definitions 1.1 Angle of repose - is the angle between a horizontal plane and the cone  

 slope of such cargo.
 1.2 Cargoes which may liquefy - are cargoes which are subject to moisture  

 migration and subsequent liquefaction if shipped with a moisture content in  

 excess of the transportable moisture limit.
 1.3 Concentrates - are materials obtained from a natural or by a process  

 of purification by physical or chemical separation and removal of unwanted  

 constituents.
 1.4 Cargo space - any space in the ship appropriated for the carriage of  

 cargo.
 1.5 Flow moisture point - is the percentage moisture content (wet weight  

 basis) at which a flow state develops under the prescribed method of test in  

 a representative sample of the material (see Appendix D.1).
 1.6 Flow state - is a state that occurs when a mass of granular material  

 is saturated with liquid to an extent that under the influence of prevailing  

 external forces such as vibration, impaction or ship's motion, it loses its  

 internal shear strength and behaves as a liquid.
 1.7 Moisture content - is that portion of a representative sample  

 consisting of water, ice or other liquid(* 2) expressed as a percentage of  

 the total wet weight of that sample.
1.8 Moisture migration - is the movement of moisture contained in a bulk  

 cargo by settling and consolidation of the cargo due to vibration and ship's  

 motion.
Water is progressively displaced which may result in some portions or  

 all of the bulk cargo developing a flow state.
1.9 Representative test sample - is a sample of sufficient quantity for  

 the purpose of testing physical and/or chemical properties of the consignment  

 to meet specified requirements.
It should be collected by means of an  

 appropriate systematic sampling procedure.
See 7.3.
 1.10 Shipper - for the purposes of this Code the term »shipper«  

 means any person by whom or in whose name or on whose behalf a contract of  

 carriage of goods by sea has been concluded with a carrier, or any person by  

 whom or in whose name or on whose behalf the goods are actually delivered to  

 the carrier in relation to the contract of carriage by sea.
 1.11 Solid bulk cargo - is any cargo, other than liquid or gas, consisting  

 of a combination of particles, granules or any larger pieces of materials,  

 generally uniform in composition, which is loaded directly into the cargo  

 spaces of a ship without any intermediate form of containment.
 1.12 Stowage factor - the stowage factor of bulk cargo is the figure which  

 expresses the number of cubic metres which one tonne of cargo will occupy.
 1.13 Transportable moisture limit - of a cargo which may liquefy,  

 represents the maximum moisture content of that cargo, which is considered  

 safe for carriage in ships not complying with the special provisions of 6.2.2  

 and 6.2.3. It is derived from the flow moisture point (flow table test  

 Appendix D.1) or from data obtained from other test methods approved by the  

 appropriate authority of the port State as being equally reliable.
 1.14 Trimming - for the purpose of this Code trimming means any levelling  

 of the cargo within a cargo space, either partial or total, by means of  

 loading spouts or chutes, portable machinery, equipment or manual labour.
Section 2 - General precautions 2.1 Cargo distribution 2.1.1 General 2.1.1.1 It is very important to ensure that bulk cargoes are properly  

 distributed throughout the ship in order that the structure will never be  

 overstressed and that the ship will have an adequate standard of stability.  

 To do this effecttively however the master needs to be provided, by the  

 shipper, with adequate information about the cargo to be shipped, e.g.  

 stowage factor, history of shifting, any particular problems, etc.
2.1.2 To prevent the structure being overstressed 2.1.2.1 When loading a high density bulk cargo having a stowage factor of  

 about 0.56 cubic metres per tonne or lower, the loaded conditions are  

 different from those found normally and it is important to pay particular  

 attention to the distribution of weights so as to avoid excessive stresses.
A  

 general cargo ship is normally constructed to carry cargoes of about  

 1.39-1.67 cubic metres per tonne when loaded to full bale cubic and  

 deadweight capacity.
Because of the high density of some bulk cargoes, it is  

 possible, by improper distribution of loading, to stress very highly either  

 the structure locally under the load or the entire hull.
It is not  

 practicable to set out exact rules for the distribution of loading in all  

 ships since the structural arrangements may vary greatly.
It is therefore  

 recommended that the master be provided with sufficiently comprehensive  

 loading information to enable him to arrange the loading aboard his ship so  

 as not to overstress the structure.
In general, masters should be guided by  

 the loading information provided in the ship's stability information booklet  

 and by the results obtained by the use of loading calculators, if available.
 2.1.2.2 When detailed information is not available for high density bulk  

 cargoes, then the following precautions are recommended:
.1 the general fore and aft distribution of cargo by weight should not  

 differ appreciably from that found satisfactory for general cargoes; .2 the maximum number of tonnes of cargo loaded in any cargo space should  

 not exceed 0.9 LBD tonnes (2.1.2.2.2) where l = length of the hold in metres B = average breadth of hold in metres D = summer load draught in metres.
.3 where cargo is untrimmed or only partially trimmed the corresponding  

 height of cargo pile peak above the cargo space floor should not exceed 1.1 x D x stowage factor (2.1.2.2.3) where the stowage factor is given in cubic metres per tonne; .4 if the cargo is trimmed entirely level the maximum number of tonnes of  

 cargo loaded in any lower hold cargo space may be increased by 20 per cent  

 over the amount calculated by formula (2.1.2.2.2), subject however to full  

 compliance with 2.1.2.2.1; .5 because of the stiffening effect of a shaft tunnel on the ship's  

 bottom, lower hold cargo spaces abaft the machinery space may be loaded  

 somewhat more deeply than provided for in 2.1.2.2.2, 2.1.2.2.3 and 2.1.2.2.4,  

 up to about 10 per cent in excess, provided that such additional loading is  

 consistent with 2.1.2.2.1.
2.1.3 To aid stability 2.1.3.1 Having regard to Regulation 19(a) of Chapter II-1 of the  

 International Convention for the safety of Life at Sea, 1974, a stability  

 information booklet should be provided aboard all ships which are subject to  

 that Convention.
Where bulk cargoes referred to in this Code, and requiring  

 any of the loading and operational precautions specified therein, are to be  

 carried, the information supplied to the master should include all necessary  

 data relative thereto.
The master must be able to calculate the stability for  

 the anticipated worst conditions during the voyage as well as that on  

 departure and show that the stability is adequate.
 2.1.3.2 In general, high density cargoes should normally be loaded in the  

 lower hold cargo spaces rather that in »tweendeck cargo spaces.
 2.1.3.3 When, however, it is necessary to carry high density cargoes in  

 »twenndecks or higher cargo spaces, care must be exercised to ensure  

 that the deck area is not overstressed and that the ship's stability is not  

 reduced below the minimum acceptable level as laid down in the ship's  

 stability information booklet supplied to the master.
 2.1.3.4 In transport of high density cargo a particularly careful  

 evaluation should be made of the consequences of sailing with an excessively  

 high GM with consequential violent movement in a seaway.
 2.1.3.5 Shifting divisions and bins, of adequate strength, should be  

 erected whenever bulk cargoes, which are suspected of readily shifting, are  

 carried in »tweendeck cargo spaces or only partially fill a cargo space.
2.2 Loading and unloading 2.2.1 Before loading, the cargo spaces should be inspected and prepared  

 for the particular bulk cargo which it is intended to load.
2.2.2 The master should ensure that bilge lines, sounding pipes and other  

 service lines within the cargo space are in good order.
Because of the  

 velocity at which some high density bulk cargoes are loaded into the cargo  

 space, special care may be necessary to protect cargo space fittings from  

 damage.
For this reason it is also prudent to sound bilges after the  

 completion of loading.
 2.2.3 Attention is particularly drawn to bilge wells and strainer plates  

 which should be specially prepared to faciliate drainage and to prevent entry  

 of the cargo into the bilge system.
 2.2.4 The master is advised that precautions should be taken to minimize  

 the extent to which dust may come into contact with the mowing parts of deck  

 machinery and external navigational aids.
 2.2.5 Wherever possible, ventilation systems should be shut down or  

 screened and air conditioning systems, if any, placed or recirculation during  

 loading or discharge, in order to minimize the entry of dust into the living  

 quarters or other interior spaces of the ship.
Section 3 - Trimming procedures 3.1 Bulk cargoes having an angle of repose(* 3) less than or equal to 35  

 degrees 3.1.1 Such cargoes should be trimmed reasonably level and cargo spaces in  

 which they are loaded should be filled as fully as is practicable without  

 resulting in an excessive cargo weight on the supporting bottom structure or  

 deck.
3.1.2 Where dry bulk cargoes which flow freely like grain are to be  

 carried, the provisions applicable to the stowage of grain cargoes should be  

 followed.
However, account should be taken of the density of the cargo when  

 determining:
.1 the scantlings and securing arrangements of divisions and bin  

 bulkheads; and .2 the stability effect of free cargo surfaces.
3.2 Bulk cargoes having an angle of repose(* 4) greater than 35 degrees 3.2.1 When cargo is loaded only in lower cargo spaces it should be trimmed  

 sufficiently to cover all of the tank top out to the ship's side, and  

 otherwise as necessary in order to reduce the pile peak height and equalize  

 the weight distribution on the bottom structure.
3.2.2 Such trimming as is necessary may generally be accomplished by  

 levelling within the hatch square (see 3.2.3) with the remaining cargo sloped  

 approximately uniformly to the lower cargo sides, and to the end bulkheads.  

 Provided that there is no conflict with the 1966 Load Line Convention, an if  

 an excessive peak height does not result, cargo may extend up through the  

 »tweendeck hatchway which should then be left uncovered.
In such case,  

 the pile should be sufficiently clear of the hatchway edges so that any  

 possible slide of the pile peak will remain in the cargo space.
3.2.3 Notwithstanding the above or the provisions in Section 2, the  

 importance of trimming as an effective means of reducing the possibility of a  

 shift of cargo can never be overstressed.
This advice applies especially to  

 smaller ships, i.e. ships of 100 metres in length or less.
Consequently the  

 loading of smaller ships requires careful supervision.
In such ships the aim  

 should be to distribute the cargo in a manner which eliminates the formation  

 of wide, steeply sloped voids beyond the trimmed surface within the area of  

 the hatch square.
3.2.4 In any ship where it is necessary to load cargo in the  

 »tweendecks, the »tweendeck hatch should be closed.
The  

 »tweendeck cargo should be trimmed reasonably level and should either  

 extend from side to side and bulkhead to bulkhead, or should be secured in  

 bins.
Because of the reduced stability when cargo is carried in the  

 »tweendecks it is also generally necessary that the cargo in the lower  

 cargo space be trimmed to a greater extent than when cargo is carried only in  

 the lower cargo space.
Section 4 - Safety of personnel 4.1 General requirements 4.1.1 Prior to, and during, loading, transport and unloading of bulk  

 cargoes, all necessary safety precautions including any appropriate national  

 regulations or requirements should be observed and, in particular, the  

 following recommandations should be taken into account:
.1 ILO Convention 32 - Convention concerning the Protection against  

 Accidents of Workers Employed in Loading or Unloading Ships (Revised), 1932; .2 ILO Code of Practice - Accident Prevention on board Ship at Sea and in  

 Port, 1978; .3 ILO Code of Practice - Safety and Health in Dock Work, 1977.
4.2 Poisoning and asphyxiation hazards 4.2.1 Certain bulk cargoes are liable to oxidation which in turn may  

 result in oxygen reduction, emission of toxic fumes and self-heating.
Other  

 bulk cargoes may not oxidise but may emit toxic fumes.
4.2.2 It is important therefore that the shipper informs the master prior  

 to loading as to whether chemical hazards exist.
The master should also refer  

 to Appendix B and the necessary precautions, especially those pertaining to  

 ventilation, should be taken.
4.2.3 Ship's masters are warned that cargo spaces and adjacent spaces may  

 be depleted in oxygen or may contain toxic or asphyxiating gases.
This may  

 happen due to oxidation, other chemical reactions or the evoluation of  

 absorbed gases.
An empty cargo space which has remained closed for some time  

 may have insufficient oxygen to support life.
 4.2.4 Unless adequate ventilation and air circulation throughout the free  

 space above the cargo have been effected, entry by personnel should not be  

 permitted until tests have been carried out and it has been established that  

 the oxygen content has been restored to normal levels throughout the space  

 and that no toxic gas is present.
4.2.5 Other cargoes may emit toxic gases when wetted.
In these cases the  

 ship should be provided with the appropriate gas detection equipment.
 4.2.6 It should be noted that a flammable gas detector is suitable only  

 for testing the explosive nature of gas mixtures.
 4.2.7 Emergency entry into a cargo space should be undertaken only by  

 trained personnel wearing selfcontained breathing apparatus, and protective  

 clothing if considered necessary, and always under the supervision of a  

 responsible officer.
 4.2.8 In the event of emergency entry into a cargo space, in addition to  

 the requirement in 4.2.4, spare self-contained breathing apparatus, safety  

 belts and safety lines should be readlily available.
4.3 Health hazards due to dust 4.3.1 To minimize the chronic risks due to exposure to the dust of certain  

 materials carried in bulk the need for a high standard of personal hygiene of  

 those exposed to the dust cannot be too strongly emphasized.
The precautions  

 should include not only the use of appropriate protective clothing and  

 barrier creams when needed but also adequate personal washing and laundering  

 of outher clothing.
Althrough these precautions are good standard practice  

 they are particularly relevant for those materials identified as toxic by the  

 Code.
4.4 Flammable atmosphere 4.4.1 Dust created by certain cargoes may constitute an explosion hazard,  

 especially while loading, unloading and cleaning.
This risk can be minimized  

 at such times by ensuring that ventilation is sufficient to prevent the  

 formation of a dust-laden atmosphere and by hosing down rather than sweeping.
4.4.2 Some cargoes may emit flammable gases in sufficient quantities to  

 constitute a fire explosion hazard.
Where this is indicated in the entries in  

 Appendix B the cargo spaces and adjacent enclosed spaces should be  

 effectively ventilated at all times.
It may be necessary to monitor the  

 atmosphere in such spaces by means of combustible gas indicators.
It should  

 be recognized that, in general, combustible gas measuring instrucments are  

 not suitable for checking an atmosphere for the presence of toxic gases.
4.5 Ventilation systems 4.5.1 Where cargoes are carried which may emit toxic or flammable gases  

 the cargo spaces should be provided with effective ventilation.
Section 5 - Methods of determining the angle of repose(* 5) 5.1 There are various methods in use to determine the angle of repose for  

 bulk materials and several are listed below for information purposes.
 5.1.1 Ores, coals and ore concentrates should be air dried in a loose  

 condition before the angle of repose is determined.
5.1.2 Tilting box method.
This method was developed mainly for laboratory  

 use and is suitable for noncohesive granular materials having a grain size  

 not greater than 10 mm.
A full description of the equipment and procedure is  

 given in Appendix D.2.1.
 5.1.3 For use on board ship, or when a tilting box is not available, an  

 auxiliary method for use with non-cohesive granular materials having a grain  

 size not greater than 10 mm is given in Appendix D.2.2. It should be noted  

 however that results thus obtained are generally lower than those obtained by  

 the tilting box method.
5.1.4 On-site method.
This method may be used to determine the angle of  

 repose for all bulk materials when a stockpile of the material to be loaded  

 is available.
The angle subtended by the surface of the stockpile and the  

 ground is measured (see Section 1). A minimum of six such measurements should  

 be taken around the circumference of the stockpile and the mean of such  

 measurements will provide the angle of repose.
Where a stockpile is not  

 available, a cone of the materials as deposited by grab, truck or similar  

 means may be utilized.
It should, however, be recognized that the larger the  

 cone so obtained the more accurately the angle of repose will equate with  

 on-board situation.
 5.2 Where masters are in doubt as to which method should be, or has been,  

 used, they should consult the port authority for advice.
Section 6 - Cargoes which may liquefy 6.1 Properties, characteristics and hazards 6.1.1 Cargoes which may liquefy include concentrates, certain coals and  

 other materials having similar physical properties.
Appendix A contains a  

 list of such cargoes which generally consist of a mixture of small particles  

 as contrasted with natural ores which include a considerable percentage of  

 large particles or lumps.
 6.1.2 At a moisture content above that of the transportable moisture limit  

 shift of cargo may accur as a result of liquefaction.
6.1.3 The major purpose of the sections of this Code dealing with these  

 cargoes is to draw the attention of masters and others to the latent risk of  

 cargo shift and to describe the precautions which are deemed necessary to  

 minimize this risk.
Such cargoes may appear to be in a relatively dry  

 granular state when loaded, and yet may contain sufficient moisture to become  

 fluid under the stimulus of compaction and the vibration which occurs during  

 a voyage.
6.1.4 In the resulting viscous fluid state, cargo may flow to one side of  

 the ship with a roll one way but mot completely return with a roll the other  

 way.
Thus, the ship may progressively reach a dangerous heel and capsize.
+++FIGUR(billede)+++ 6.1.5 To prevent subsequent shifting and also to decrease the effects of  

 oxidation when the material has a predisposition to oxidize, these cargoes  

 should be trimmed reasonably level on completion of loading irrespective of  

 the stated angel of repose.
6.2 Precautions 6.2.1 General 6.2.1.1 Ships other than specially constructed or fitted ships (see 6.2.2  

 and 6.2.3) should carry only those cargoes having a moisture content not in  

 excess of the transportable moisture limit as defined in this Code.
 6.2.1.2 Cargoes which contain liquids, other than packaged canned goods or  

 the like, should not be stowed in the same cargo space above or adjacent to a  

 consignment of these cargoes.
 6.2.1.3 Adequate precautions to prevent liquids entering the cargo space  

 in which these cargoes are stowed should be maintained during the voyage.  

 Such precautions are of paramount importance in the case of some of these  

 cargoes where contact with sea water could lead to serious problems or  

 corrosion to either the hull or machinery items.
6.2.1.4 Masters are cautioned of the possible danger in using water to  

 cool a shipment of these cargoes while the ship is at sea since the admission  

 of water in quantity may well bring the moisture content of these cargoes to  

 a flow state.
Water is most effectively applied in the form of a spray.
6.2.2 Specially fitted cargo ships 6.2.2.1 Cargoes having a moisture content in excess of the transportable  

 moisture limit may be carried in cargo ships which are fitted with specially  

 designed portable divisions to confine any shift of cargo to an acceptable  

 limit.
6.2.2.2 The design and positioning of such special arrangements must  

 adequately provide for not only the restraint of the immense forces generated  

 by the flow movement of high density bulk cargoes, but also the need to  

 reduce to an acceptable safe level the potential heeling moments arising out  

 of a cargo flow transversely across the cargo space.
Divisions provided to  

 meet these requirements should not be constructed of wood.
 6.2.2 .3 It may also be necessary for elements of the ship's structure  

 bounding such cargo to be strengthened.
6.2.2.4 The plan of special arrangements deemed necessary and details of  

 the stability conditions on which the design has been based should have been  

 approved by the Administration of the country of the ship's registry.
In such  

 cases the ship concerned should carry evidence of approval by its  

 Administration.
6.2.3 Specially constructed cargo ships 6.2.3.1 Cargoes having a moisture content in excess of the transportable  

 moisture limit may be carried in specially constructed cargo ships which have  

 permanent structural boundaries, so arranged as to confine any shift of cargo  

 to an acceptable limit.
The ship concerned should carry evidence of approval  

 by its Administration.
6.2.4 Submission of data 6.2.4.1 A submission made to the Administration for approval of such a  

 ship under 6.2.2 or 6.2.3 should include:
.1 scaled longitudinal and transverse sections, drawings and relevant  

 structural drawings; .2 stability calculations, taking into account loading arrangements and  

 possible shift of the cargo, showing the distribution of cargo and liquids in  

 tanks, and of cargo which may become fluid; .3 any other information which may assist in the assessment of the  

 submission.
Section 7 - The assessment of acceptability of consignments for safe  

 shipment 7.1 The provision of information 7.1.1 Prior to shipment the shipper should provide details regarding the  

 nature of the cargo.
 7.1.2 Prior to loading, the shipper or his appointed agent should provide  

 to the master details, as appropriate, of the characteristics and properties,  

 e.g. chemical hazards, flow moisture point, stowage factor, moisture content,  

 angle of repose, etc., of any material constituting bulk cargo in order that  

 any safety precautions which may be necessary can be put into effect.
7.1.3 To do this the shipper will need to arrange, possibly in  

 consultation with the producers, for the cargo to be properly sampled and  

 tested.
Furthermore the shipper should provide the ship's master with the  

 appropriate certificates of test, as applicable for a given cargo.
7.2 Certificates of test 7.2.1 A certificate or certificates stating the relevant characteristic of  

 the material to be loaded should be provided to the master at the loading  

 point.
7.2.2 Certificates stating the transportable moisture limits should  

 contain, or be accompanied, by a statement by the shipper that the moisture  

 content specified in the certificate of moisture content is, to the best of  

 his knowledge and belief, the average moisture content of the cargo at the  

 time the certificate is present to the master.
When cargo is to be loaded  

 into more than one cargo space of a ship the certificate of moisture content  

 should certify the moisture content of each type of finely grained material  

 loaded into each cargo space.
However, if sampling according to the  

 procedures recommended in this Code indicates that the moisture content is  

 uniform throughout the consignment, then one certificate of average moisture  

 content for all cargo spaces should be acceptable.
 7.2.3 Where certification is required by Appendix B for materials  

 possessing chemical hazards, the certificate should contain or be accompanied  

 by a statement from the shipper that the chemical characteristics of the  

 material are, to the best of his knowledge, those existing at the time of the  

 ship's loading.
7.3 Sampling procedures 7.3.1 It is evident that any physical property tests on the bulk cargo  

 material will be meaningless unless they are conducted on test samples which  

 are established as truly representative of the consignment, prior to loading.
 7.3.2 Sampling should be conducted only by persons who have been suitably  

 trained in sampling procedures and who are under the supervision of somemore  

 who is fully aware of the properties of the material and also the applicable  

 principles and practices of sampling.
7.3.3 Prior to taking samples, and within the limits of practicability, a  

 visual inspection of the material which is to form the ship's cargo should be  

 carried out.
Any substantial portions of material which appear to be  

 contaminated or significantly different in characteristics or moisture  

 content from the bulk of the consignment should be sampled and analysed  

 separately.
 Depending upon the results obtained in these tests it may be necessary to  

 reject those particular portions as unfit for shipment.
 7.3.4 Representative samples should be obtained by employing techniques  

 which take the following factors into account:
.1 the type of material; .2 the particle size distribution; .3 composition of the material and its variability; .4 the manner in which the material is stored, in stockpiles, rail wagons  

 or other containers, and transferred or loaded by material handling systems  

 such as conveyors, loading chutes, crane grabs, etc.; .5 the characteristics which have to be determined: moisture content, flow  

 moisture point, bulk density/stowage factor, angle of repose, etc.; .6 variations in moisture distribution throughout the consignment which  

 may occur due to weather conditions, natural drainage, e.g. to lower levels  

 of stockpiles or containers, or other forms of moisture migration.
7.3.5 Throughout sampling procedures, the utmost care should be taken to  

 prevent changes in quality and characteristics.
Samples should be immediately  

 placed in suitable sealed containers which are properly marked.
 7.3.6 Useful guidance on the method of sampling to be employed may be  

 obtained from internationally or nationally recognized procedures such as  

 those listed in 7.5.
7.4 Frequency of sampling and testing for »flow moisture point«  

 and »moisture content« determination 7.4.1 A test to determine the »Flow moisture point« of cargoes  

 which may liquefy should be conducted at regular intervals.
Even in the case  

 of materials of consistent composition this test should be conducted at least  

 once every six months.
However, where the composition or characteristics are  

 variable for any reason, more frequent testing is necessary.
In such cases  

 testing once every three months and possibly more frequently is essential as  

 such variations could have significant effect of the value of the flow  

 moisture point.
In certain cases it will be necessary to test every shipment.
7.4.2 Sampling and testing for »moisture content« should be  

 conducted as near as possible to the time of loading, but it any event, the  

 time interval between sampling/testing and loading should never be more than  

 seven days unless the consignment is adequately protected to ensure that no  

 change occurs in its moisture content.
Furthermore, whenever there has been  

 significant rain or snow between the time of testing and loading, check test  

 should be conducted to ensure that the material is still in a safe state to  

 load.
7.5 Standardized sampling procedures The Canadian Standard Sampling Procedure for Concentrate Stockpiles The European Communities Method of Sampling for the Comtrol of the Section 8 - Cargoes which may liquefy: test procedures 8.1 The recommended test procedures given in Appendix D provide for the  

 laboratory determination of:
.1 the moisture content of representative samples of the cargo to be  

 loaded; .2 the flow moisture point and the transportable moisture limit of the  

 cargo.
 8.2 Appendix D.1 is divided into two subsections: D.1.1 which applies to  

 concentrates and similar materials and D.1.2 which applies to coals.
8.3 If the circumstances are such that a laboratory test cannot be made of  

 the cargo about to be loaded and a suitable drying oven and a weighing scale  

 are available on board ship, an auxiliary check test of the moisture content  

 of the cargo about to be loaded may be carried out according to the  

 procedures specified in Appendix D.1.1.4.4. Other methods for direct  

 measurements of moisture content approved by the approiate authority for  

 specific cargoes may be used for this purpose.
Where the moisture content is  

 above or near the transportable moisture limit, the cargo should not be  

 accepted until proper laboratory tests have been completed.
 8.4 If the master has doubts as regards the appearance or condition of the  

 cargo for safe shipment, a check test for approximately determining the  

 possibility of flow may be carried out on board ship or at the dockside by  

 the following auxiliary method:
.1 Half fill a cylindrical can or similar container (0.5-1 litre capacity)  

 with a sample of cargo.
Take the can in one hand and bring it down sharply to  

 strike a hard surface such as a solid table from a height of about 0.2 m.  

 Repeat the procedure 25 times at one or two second intervals.
Examine the  

 surface for free moisture or fluid conditions.
If free moisture or a fluid  

 condition appears, arrangements should be made to have additional laboratory  

 tests on the cargo conducted before it is accepted for loading.
 8.5 The recommended test procedures given in Appendix D reflect the  

 majority opinion of those countries participating in its preparation.  

 However, other methods which have been approved by the appropriate  

 authorities as being equally reliable may be used.
Section 9 - Materials possessing chemical hazards: description of hazards 9.1 General Appendix B contains the list of materials currently carried in bulk which,  

 because of their chemical nature or properties, can present a hazard during  

 transport.
Some of these materials are classified as dangerous goods in the  

 IMDG Code; also included are other cargoes which, when carried in bulk, may  

 give rise to a hazardous situation.
It should be carefully noted, however,  

 that this list of materials is not exhaustive and that the hazardous  

 properties attributed to them are for guidance only.
Consequently, whenever  

 the shipment of a bulk cargo is contemplated, it is essential to obtain  

 currently valid information about its potential hazards prior to loading.
9.2 Classes of hazard The classes of hazard likely to be presented by the cargoes listed in  

 Appendix B as given in the 1974 SOLAS Convention, Chapter VII, are listed  

 below together with notes which will assist in the interpretation of these  

 definitions.
.1 Class 4.1 Flammable(* 6) solids Materials of this Class possess the common property of being easily  

 ignited by external sources, such as sparks or flame, and of being readily  

 combustible.
.2 Class 4.2 Flammable solids, or substances, liable to spontaneous  

 combustion Materials of this Class possess the common property of being liable  

 spontaneously to heat and to ignite.
.3 Class 4.3 Flammable solids, or substances which, in contact with water,  

 emit flammable gases Materials of this Class possess the common property, when in contact with  

 water, of evolving flammable gases.
In some cases these gases are liable to  

 spontaneous ignition.
.4 Class 5.1 Oxidizing substances Materials in this Class while in themselves not necessarily combustible  

 may, generally by yielding oxygen, cause or contribute to the combustion of  

 other marterial (and as a result may stimulate combustion, and increase the  

 violence of a (fire). Neither sealing off the cargo space nor the use of  

 steam, CO2 or other inert gas extinguishers is therefore likely to be  

 effective against fire.
The prompt use of large quantities of water is  

 probably the most effective means of controlling fire in these cargoes.
.5 Class 6.1 Poisonous (toxic) substances Materials of this Class possess the common property of being liable to  

 cause death or serious injury to human health if swallowed, inhaled or by  

 skin contact.
.6 Class 7 Radioactive substances Materials of this Class possess the common property of spontaneously  

 emitting significant radiation and of which the specific activity is greater  

 than 0.002 microcuries per gram.
.7 Class 8 Corrosives Materials of this Class possess in their original state the common  

 property of being able more or less severely to damage living tissues, and  

 may also cause damage to other cargo or the ship by corrosion.
 .8 Class 9 Miscellaneous dangerous substances, that is any other substance  

 which experimence has shown, or may show, to be of such a dangerous character  

 that the provisions of Chapter VII of the 1974 SOLAS Convention should apply  

 to it.
 Materials of this Class possess hazards which cannot properly be brought  

 under the other classes listed above.
9.3 Materials hazardous only in bulk (MHB) Materials of this type while they may not necessarily be listed in the  

 IMDG Code may, when carried in bulk, present a sufficient hazard to require  

 some degree of caution.
For example, materials which reduce the oxygen  

 content of a cargo space and those which are prone to self-heating are  

 regarded as belonging to this group.
Section 10 - Materials possessing chemical hazards 10.1 Identification 10.1.1 The majority of such materials are included in Appendix B and their  

 hazard class will be listed as described in Section 9 (i.e.
IMCO Class or  

 »MHB« - materials hazardous only in bulk).
10.1.2 The non-appearance of a material in Appendix B should not be taken  

 as an absolute guarantee of its non-hazarderous nature.
Current valid  

 information should always be obtained prior to loading.
10.2 Segregation 10.2.1 Stowage of such materials should be so arranged at all times that  

 dangerous or hazardous materials carried in bulk are kept segregated from  

 dangerous goods carried in packaged or unitized form in accordance with the  

 information given under their individual entries and in the case of  

 explosives as shown in the explosives segregation table.
10.2.2 When two or more different incompatible bulk commodities possessing  

 chemical hazards are to be carried, the segregation between them shall be at  

 least equivalent to that described under 10.4.2 »separated from«.  

 Segregation is not necessary between different grades of the same material.  

 However, where different grades are carried in the same cargo space the most  

 stringent stowage provisions applicable to any of the different grades shall  

 apply to all.
When loading different solid bulk materials which are  

 incompatible, such cargoes should not be loaded simultaneously.
Similarly,  

 toxic bulk materials and bulk food and feedstuffs should not be loaded  

 simultaneously.
Upon completion of loading one such material the hatch covers  

 of every cargo space containing it should be closed and the decks cleared of  

 residues before loading of other materials is recommended.
When unloading,  

 the same procedures should be followed.
Such cleaning is essential where bulk  

 flammable materials and bulk materials of Class 5.1 are carried, to prevent  

 combustion.
 10.2.3 The determination of the incompatibility of bulk commodities should  

 be made by the competent authority.
 10.2.4 Boundaries, e.g. bulkheads or decks used for the segregation of  

 bulk dangerous cargoes from other dangerous cargoes, in either bulk or  

 packaged form, need be resistant to the passage of the fire and liquid only  

 where indicated under individual entries.
10.3 Cargo distribution and trimming 10.3.1 The provisions of Section 2, 3 and 4 of this Code relating to cargo  

 distribution, trimming and personnel safety apply as much to cargoes dealt  

 with under this section as to any others.
10.4 Segregation table to be used when loading bulk cargoes possessing  

 chemical hazards and explosives in packaged form Appendix B Replace page 40 by the followings pages.
10.4.1 Explanation of the segregation table Numbers in the above table relate to the following terms, as definied in  

 sub-section 15.8 of the general introduction to the IMDG Code.
10.4.2 »Separated from:» (2) In different cargo spaces when stowed under deck.
Provided an intervening  

 deck is resistant to fire and liquid, a vertical separation, i.e. in  

 different cargo spaces may be accepted as equivalent to this segregation.
10.4.3 »Seperation by a complete cargo space or hold from:» (3) Means either a vertical or a horizontal separation.
If the decks are not  

 resistant to fire and liquid, then only a longitudinal separation, i.e. by an  

 intervening complete hold, is acceptable.
10.4.4 »Separated longitudinally by an intervening complete hold  

 from:» (4) Vertical separation alone does not meet this requirement for »on  

 deck« stowage; this segregation means a separation by the corresponding  

 distance.
 LEGEND:
 Reference bulk cargo:
 Incompatible packaged explosives:
 Deck resistant to fire and water:
(see 10.2.3) Section 11 - Stowage factor conversion tables 11.1 Cubic metres per metric tonne to cubic feet per long ton (2240 lb,  

 1016 kg) Factor: 1 m3/t 35.87 ft3/ton (rounded to the nearest hundredth of a  

 ft3/ton) APPENDIX A LIST OF CARGOES WHICH MAY LIQUEFY A.1 General A.1.1 This Appendix lists materials which may liquefy and which, if  

 shipped »wet«, may shift transversely during the voyage due to the  

 effects of moisture migration.
A.1.2 It should be carefully noted that this list of materials is not  

 exhaustive and that the physical and/or chemical properties attributed to  

 them are for guidance only.
Consequently, whenever the shipment of a bulk  

 cargo is contemplated, it is essential to obtain currently valid information  

 about its physical properties prior to loading.
A.2 Mineral concentrates A.2.1 Varying terminology excists to describe mineral concentrates.
All  

 known terms are listed below but the list is not exhaustive.
 A.2.2 The stowage factor of these materials is generally low; from 0.33 to  

 0.57 kubikmeter/t.
 A.2.3 When loading the above materials reference should also be made to  

 the entry »CONCENTRATES« in Appendix B.
A.3 Other materials A.3.1 Many fine particle materials, if possessing a sufficiently high  

 moisture content, are liable to moisture migration.
Thus any fine particle  

 cargo appearing excessively wet should be treated with caution and, if  

 considered necessary, should be tested for flow characteristics prior to  

 loading.
A.3.2 Fish in bulk can act as a cargo which may liquefy and when proposed  

 for carriage in bulk in a cargo ship, the competent authority should be  

 consulted.
The Code of Safety for Fishermen, Part B, provides useful  

 information on this subject.
 A.3.3 The list below contains only materials (other than cargoes which may  

 liquefy) that have been reported as capable of attaining a flow state and is  

 not exhaustive.
APPENDIX B LIST OF BULK MATERIALS POSSESSING CHEMICAL HAZARDS 1 This Appendix lists materials which were known at the time of  

 publication to be carried in bulk and which possess a chemical hazard which  

 could give rise to a dangerous situation on board ship.
2 It should be carefully noted that this list of products is not  

 exhaustive and that the physical and chemical properties attributed to them  

 are for guidance only.
Consequently, whenever the shipment of a bulk cargo is  

 contemplated, it is essential to obtain currently valid information about its  

 physical and chemical properties prior to loading.
 3 In circumstances where consultation with the competent authority is  

 required prior to bulk shipment of materials, it is equally important to  

 consult authorities at the ports of loading and discharge, concerning  

 requirements which may be in force.
 4 At the earliest opportunity, prior to completion of loading, the angle  

 of repose of the material to be loaded should be determined (see Section 5)  

 so as to determine which provisions of the Code relating to trimming apply  

 (see Section 3).
 5 Where required, the Medical First Aid Guide for Use in Accidents  

 Involving Dangerous Goods (MFAG) should be consulted prior to loading.
APPENDIX C LIST OF BULK CARGOES WHICH ARE NEITHER LIABLE TO LIQUEFY (APPENDIX A) NOR  

 POSSESS CHEMICAL HAZARDS (APPENDIX B) 1 It should be carefully noted that this list of materials is not  

 exhaustive and that the physical and chemical properties attributed to them  

 are for guidance only.
Consequently, whenever the shipment of af bulk cargo  

 is contemplated, it is essential to obtain from the shipper currently valid  

 information about its physical and chemical properties prior to loading.
 2 At the earliest opportunity, prior to completion of loading, the  

 »angle of repose« of the material to be loaded should be determined  

 (see Section 5) so as to determine which provisions of the Code relating to  

 trimming apply (see Section 3).
APPENDIX D LABORATORY TEST PROCEDURES, ASSOCIATED APPARATUS AND STANDARDS D.1 Test procedures for cargoes which may liquefy and associated apparatus D.2 Test procedures to determine the angle of repose and associated  

 apparatus D.3 Standards used in test procedures D.4 Trough test for the determination of the self-sustaining exothermic  

 decomposition of fertilizers containing nitrates D.1 Test procedures for cargoes which may liquefy and associated apparatus Section D.1 is divided into two sub-sections: D.1.1 applies to  

 concentrates and similar materials; D.1.2 applies to coal.
D.1.1 Recommended test procedure for concentrates and similar material D.1.1.1 Scope The test described below provides for determination of:
.1 The moisture content of a sample which may be a mineral concentrate or  

 other similar fine grained material.
These will hereinafter be referred to as  

 the test material.
 .2 The flow moisture point of the test material under impact or cyclic  

 forces of the flow table apparatus.
 .3 The transportable moisture limit of the test material.
D.1.1.2 Apparatus (see figure D.1.1.2) .1 Standard flow table and frame (ASTM Designation (C230-68) see D.3).
 .2 Flow table mounting (ASTM Designation (C230-68) see D.3).
 .3 Mould (ASTM Designation (C230-68) see D.3).
 .4 Tamper (see figure D.1.1.2.4).
 .5 Scales and weights (ASTM Designation (C190-73) see D.3) and suitable  

 sample containers.
 .6 Glass graduated measuring cylinder and burette having capacities of  

 100-200 ml and 10 ml respectively.
.7 A hemispherical mixing bowl approximately 30 cm diameter, rubber gloves  

 and drying dishes or pans.
Alternatively an automatic mixer of similar  

 capacity can be used for the mixing operations.
In this case care should be  

 exercised to ensure that the use of such a mechanical mixer does not reduce  

 the particle size or consistency of the test material.
.8 A drying oven with controlled temperature up to approximately 110  

 degrees C.
This oven should be without air circulation.
D.1.1.3 Temperature and humidity It is preferable to work in a room where the samples will be protected  

 from excessive temperatures, air currents and humidity variations.
All phases  

 of the material preparation and testing procedure should be accomplished in a  

 reasonable space of time to minimize moisture losses and, in any event,  

 within the day of commencement.
Where possible, sample containers should be  

 covered with plastic film or other suitable cover.
D.1.1.4 Procedure The quantity of material required for a flow moisture test will vary  

 according to the specific gravity of the material to be tested.
This will  

 range from approximately 2 kg for coal to 3 kg for mineral concentrates.
It  

 should be collected as a representative sample of the cargo being shipped.  

 Experience has shown that more accurate test results will be obtained by  

 ensuring that the moisture content of the test sample is increased rather  

 than decreased towards the flow moisture point.
Consequently it is  

 recommended that a preliminary flow moisture test should be conducted,  

 generally in accordance with the following, to indicate the condition of the  

 test sample, i.e. the quantity of water and the rate at which it has to be  

 added or whether the sample should be air dried to reduce its moisture  

 content before commencing the main flow moisture test.
D.1.1.4.1 Preparation of the test sample The representative sample of test material is placed in the mixing bowl  

 and thoroughly mixed.
Three sub-samples (A, B and C) are removed from the  

 mixing bowl as follows: About one fifth of the sample (A) shall be  

 immediately weighed and placed in the drying oven to determine the moisture  

 content of the sample »as received«.
Two further sub-samples, each  

 of about two fifths of the gross weight shall then be taken, one (B) for the  

 preliminary flow moisture point test and the other (C) for the main flow  

 moisture point determination.
 Having completed the preliminary flow moisture point test, the sample for  

 the main test is adjusted to the required level of moisture content below the  

 flow point.
.1 Filling the mould.
The mould is placed on the centre of the flow table  

 and filled in three stages with the material from the mixing bowl.
The first  

 charge, after tamping, should aim to fill the mould to approximately one  

 third of its depth.
The quantity of sample required to achieve this will vary  

 from one material to another, but can readily be established after some  

 experience has been gained on the packing characteristics of the material  

 being tested.
The second charge, after tamping, should fill the mould to about two  

 thirds of its depth and the third and final charge, after tamping, should  

 reach to just below the top of the mould (see fig.
D.1.1.4-2).
.2 Tamping procedure.
A tamper of a type illustrated in fig.
D.1.1.2-4  

 should be used.
Since the tamping operation is performed manually, it is  

 difficult to define clearly an exact and reproducible procedure.
However, the  

 aim should be to attain a degree of compaction similar to that prevailing at  

 the bottom of a shipboard cargo of the material being tested.
To this end, it  

 is recommended that firm pressure of the tamper (not distinct blows) should  

 be applied successively over the whole area of the sample until a uniformly  

 at surface is obtained over the entire area, particularly at the outer edges  

 of each successive layer.
.3 Removal of the mould.
The mould is tapped on its side until it becomes  

 loose, leaving the sample in the shape of a truncated cone on the table.
D.1.1.4.2 The preliminary flow moisture test .1 Immediately after removing the mould, the flow table is raised and  

 dropped up to 50 times through a height of 12.5 mm at a rate of 25 times per  

 minute.
If the material is below the flow moisture point, it usually crumbles  

 and bumps off in fragments with successive drops of the table (see fig.  

 D.1.1.4-3).
 .2 At this stage, the flow table is stopped and the material returned to  

 the mixing bowl where 5-10 ml of water, or possibly more, is sprinkled over  

 the surface and thoroughly mixed into the material, either with rubber gloved  

 fingers or an automatic mixer.
The mould is again filled and the flow table is operated as described in  

 D.1.1.4.2.1 for up to 50 drops.
If a flow state is not developed, the process  

 is repeated with further additions of water until a flow state has been  

 reached.
.3 Identification of a flow state.
The impacting action of the flow table  

 causes the grains to rearrange themselves to produce compaction of the mass.  

 As a result, the fixed volume of moisture contained in the material at any  

 given level increases as a percentage of the total volume.
A flow state is  

 considered to have been reached when the moisture content and compaction of  

 the sample produce a level of saturation such that plastic deformation  

 occurs.(* 7) At this stage, the moulded sides of the sample may deform,  

 giving a convex or concave profile (see fig.
D.1.1.4-4).
With repeated action of the flow table, the sample continues to slump and  

 to flow outwards.
In certain materials cracks may also develop on the top  

 surface.
Cracking without the appearance of free moisture is not however an  

 indication of development of a flow state.
In most cases, measurement of the  

 deformation is helpful in deciding whether or not plastic flow has occurred.  

 A template which, for example, will indicate an increase in diameter of up to  

 3 mm in any part of the cone is a useful guide for this purpose.
Some  

 additional observations may be useful.
For example: When the (increasing)  

 moisture content is approaching the flow moisture point the sample cone  

 begins to show a tendency to stick to the mould.
Further, when the sample is  

 pushed off the table, the sample may leave tracks (stripes) of moisture on  

 the table.
If such stripes are seen the moisture content may be above the  

 flow moisture point.
Deformation of the cone may appear at moisture contents  

 lower than the flow moisture point, but in that case the sample will leave no  

 moisture tracks when removed.
Measuring the diameter of the cone, at the base or at half height, will  

 always be useful.
By addition of water in increments of 0.4 to 0.5 per cent  

 and applying 25 drops of the flow table, the first diameter increase will  

 generally be between 1 and 5 mm and after a further increment of water the  

 base diameter would have expanded to between 5 and 10 mm.
.4 As an alternative to the procedure described above, for many  

 concentrates a fast way of finding the approximate flow moisture point is as  

 follows: When the moisture content is definitely beyond the flow moisture  

 point, measure the diameter after 25 knocks, repeat the test after adding a  

 further increment of water, measure the diameter and draw a diagram as  

 illustrated in fig.
D.1.1.4-1 showing increase in diameter plotted against  

 moisture content.
A straight line drawn through the two points will cross the  

 moisture content axis close to the flow moisture point.
D.1.1.4.3 The main flow moisture test When a flow state has been reached in the preliminary test, the moisture  

 content of sub-sample (C) is adjusted to approximately the last value which  

 did not cause flow in the preliminary test.
The final test is then carried  

 out on this adjusted sample in the same manner as for the preliminary test,  

 but in this case with the addition of water in increments of only 0.4 to 0.5  

 per cent of the weight of the test material.
At each stage a representative  

 sample of 100-200 grams is taken from the mixing bowl, placed in a closed  

 weighing glass and retained for moisture determination if required.
When a flow state has been reached, the moisture content should be  

 determined on two samples, one with a moisture content just above the flow  

 moisture point and the other with a moisture content just below the flow  

 moisture point.
The difference between the two values should then be 0.5 per  

 cent or less and the flow moisture point is taken as the mean of these two  

 values.
D.1.1.4.4 Determination of moisture content Introduction It should be noted that for many materials, there are recognized  

 international and national methods for determining moisture content.
These  

 methods, or ones that have been established to give equivalent results, shall  

 be followed.
Samples to be dried at 105 degrees C It is clearly important that the samples should be dried to constant  

 weight.
In practice, this is ascertained after a suitable drying period, by  

 weighing the sample successively with an interval of several hours elapsing.  

 If the weight remains constant, drying has been completed; whereas if the  

 weight is still decreasing, drying is continued.
The length of the drying period depends upon many variables such as the  

 disposition of the material in the oven, the type of container used, the  

 particle size, the rate of heat transfer, etc.
It may be that a period of  

 five hours is ample for one concentrate sample whereas it is not sufficient  

 for another.
 Sulphide concentrates tend to oxidize and therefore the use of drying  

 ovens with air circulation systems is not recommended for these materials,  

 nor should the test sample be left in the drying oven for more than four  

 hours.
Examples of calculation Taking w1 as the exact weight of the sub-sample as received of  

 approximately 1/5 of the gross sample (see D.1.1.4.2); Taking w2 as the exact weight of the first sub-sample after drying of  

 approximately 1/5 of the gross sample (see D.1.1.4.2); Taking w3 as the exact weight of the sample just above flow state of  

 approximately 100-200 g (see D.1.1.4.2); Taking w4 as the exact weight of the  

 sample just above flow state after drying of approximately 100-200 g (see  

 D.1.1.4.3); Taking w5 as the exact weight of the sample just below flow state (see  

 D.1.1.4.3); Taking w6 as the exact weight of the sample just below flow state after  

 drying (see D.1.1.4.3); Then .1 The moisture content of the concentrate as received is .2 The flow moisture point of the concentrate is .3 The transportable moisture limit of the concentrate is D.1.2 Test procedures for coals D.1.2.1 Coals with maximum grain size below 1 mm The procedures described in D.1.1.2 to D.1.1.4.3 inclusive apply.
D.1.2.1.1 Determination of moisture content The recommended methods for determinations of the moisture content are  

 those described in ISO 589-1974 »Hard coal - Determination of total  

 moisture«.
This method or ones that have been established to give  

 equivalent results should be followed.
D.1.2.2 Coals with maximum grain size in the range of 1 to 7 mm The procedures described in D.1.1.2 to D.1.1.4.3 may not be applicable  

 because the coarser grains can cause the flow moisture point on the flow  

 table to be indeterminate.
For such coals the procedures to be adopted should  

 be those approved by authority of the port State.
D.1.2.3 Coals with maximum grain size in excess of 7 mm The procedures described in D.1.1.2 to D.1.1.4.3 inclusive are not  

 applicable.
Experience has shown that the flow table method is unsuitable for  

 these coals.
The procedures to be adopted should be those approved by the  

 authority of the port State.
 D.1.2.2 and D.1.2.3 also apply to other coarse materials on which a  

 satisfactory result cannot be obtained by the flow table method.
D.2 Test procedures to determine the angle of repose and associated  

 apparatus D.2.1 Determination of angle of repose of fined grained materials (size  

 less than 10 mm) »tilting box test«.
For use in laboratory or Port  

 of Loading D.2.1.1 Scope The test provides for the determination of the angle of repose of the fine  

 grained non-cohesive materials (size less than 10 mm). The results so  

 obtained may be used when interpreting Sections 3 and 4 of this Code for the  

 materials in question.
D.2.1.2 Definition The angle of repose obtained by this test is the angle formed between the  

 horizontal and the top of the testbox when the material in the box just  

 begins to slide in bulk.
D.2.1.3 Principle of test When measuring the angle of repose by this method the material surface  

 must initially be level and parallel to the testbox base.
The box is tilted  

 without vibration and tilting is stopped with the product just begins to  

 slide in bulk.
D.2.1.4 Apparatus (see figure D.2.1.4) Apparatus is as follows:
.1 A framework on top of which is attached an open box.
Attachment of the  

 box to the frame is by means of a shaft passing through bearings affixed to  

 both the frame and the end of the box, enabling the box to be subjected to a  

 controlled tilt.
 .2 The dimensions of the box are 600 mm long, 400 mm wide and 200 mm high.
 .3 To prevent sliding of the material along the buttom of the box during  

 tilting, a tightly fitting grating (openings 30 x 30 x 25 mm) is placed to  

 the bottom of the box before filling.
.4 Tilting of the box is effected by a hydraulic cylinder fitted between  

 the frame and the bottom of the box.
Other means may be used to obtain the  

 required tilting but in all cases vibration must be eliminated.
 .5 To pressurize the hydraulic cylinder, a hydropneumatic accumulator may  

 be used, pressurized by air or gas at a pressure of about 5  

 kp/squarecentimetre.
 .6 The rate of tilting should be approximately 0.3 degrees/sec.
 .7 Range of tilt should be at least 50 degrees.
.8 A protractor is fitted to the end of the shaft.
One lever of the  

 protractor is fitted so that it may be screw-adjusted to the horizontal.
 .9 The protractor should measure the angle of the top of the box to the  

 horizontal to within an accuracy of 0.5 degrees.
 .10 A spirit level or some other levelling device must be available to  

 zero the protractor.
D.2.1.5 Procedure The box is filled with the material to be tested by pouring it slowly and  

 carefully from the lowest practical height into the box in order to obtain  

 uniformity of loading.
 The excess material is scraped off by the aid of a straight edge, inclined  

 at about 45 degrees towards the direction of scraping.
 The tilting system is then activated and stopped when the material just  

 begins to slide in bulk.
 The angle of the top of the box to the horizontal is measured by the  

 protractor and recorded.
D.2.1.6 Evaluation The angle of repose is calculated as the mean of three measurements and is  

 reported to within half a degree.
Notes Preferably the test should be carried out with three independent samples.
 Care should be taken to ensure that the shaft is adjusted to be horizontal  

 before testing.
D.2.2 Alternative or shipboard test method to be used for the  

 determination of the angle of repose when the tilting box is not available D.2.2.1 Definition According to this method the angle of repose is the angle between the cone  

 slope and the horizontal measured at half height.
D.2.2.2 Principle of test To determine the angle of repose, a quantity of the material to be tested  

 is poured very carefully out of a flask onto a sheet of rough-textured paper,  

 in such a way that a symmetrical cone is formed.
D.2.2.3 Equipment The necessary equipment to carry out this test is as follows:
- a horizontal table free from vibrations; - a sheet of rough-textured paper onto which the material should be  

 poured; - a protractor; - a 3 litre conical flask.
D.2.2.4 Procedure Put the sheet of paper on the table.
Split 10 cubic decimetre of the  

 material to be tested into three sub-samples and test each in the following  

 way:
Pour two thirds of the sub-sample (i.e. 2 cubic decimetre) onto the sheet  

 producing a starting cone.
The remainder of this sub-sample is then poured  

 very carefully from a height off a few millimetres above on top of the cone.  

 Care should be taken that the cone will be built up symmetrically.
This may  

 be achieved by revolving the flask slowly close around the top of the cone  

 when pouring.
 When measuring, care should be taken that the protractor does not touch  

 the cone, otherwise this may result in sliding of the material and spoil the  

 test.
 The angle has to be measured at 4 places around the cone, about 90 degrees  

 apart.
 This test should be repeated on the other two sub-samples.
D.2.2.5 Calculations The angle of repose is taken as the mean of the 12 measurements and is  

 reported to half a degree.
This figure can be coverted to the tilting box  

 value as follows:
at = as plus 3 degrees (D.2.2.5) where at = angle of repose according to the tilting box test, as = angle of repose according to the survey test.
D.3 Standards used in test procedures D.3.1 Standard flow table and frame(* 8) D.3.1.1 Flow table and frame D.3.1.1 The flow table apparatus shall be constructed in accordance with  

 fig.
D.3. The apparatus shall consist of an integrally cast rigid iron frame  

 and a circular rigid table top 10 +/- 0.1 inches (254 +/- 25 mm) in diameter,  

 with a shaft attached perpendicular to the table top by means of a screw  

 thread.
The table top to which the shaft with its integral contact shoulder  

 is attached, shall be mounted on a frame in such a manner that it can be  

 raised and dropped vertically through the specified height with a tolerance  

 in height of +/- 0.005 inches (0.13 mm) for new tables and +/- 0.015 inches  

 (0.39 mm) for tables in use, by means of a rotated cam.
The table top shall  

 have a fine machined place surface, free of blowholes and surface defects,  

 and shall be scribed as shown in fig.
D.3. The table top shall be of cast  

 brass or bronze having a Rockwell hardness number not less than HRB 25 with  

 an edge thickness of 0.3 inches (8 mm), and shall have six integral radial  

 stiffening ribs.
The table top and attached shaft shall weight 9 +/- 0.1 lb  

 (4 +/- 0.05 kg) and the weight shall be symmetrical around the centre of the  

 shaft.
D.3.1.1.2 The cam and vertical shaft shall be of medium carbon machinery  

 steel, hardened where indicated in fig.
D.3. The shaft shall be straight and  

 the difference between the diameter of the shaft and the diameter of the bore  

 of the frame shall be not less than 0.002 inches (0.05 mm) and not more than  

 0.003 inches (0.08 mm) for new tables and shall be maintained at from 0.002  

 to 0.010 inches (0.26 mm) for tables in use.
The end of the shaft shall not  

 fall upon the cam at the end of the drop, but shall make contact with the cam  

 not less than 120 degrees from the point of drop.
The face of the cam shall  

 be a smooth spiralled curve of uniformly increasing radius from 1/2 to 1 1/4  

 inches (13 to 32 mm) in 360 degrees and there shall be no appreciable jar as  

 the shaft comes into contact with the cam.
The cam shall be so located and  

 the contact faces of the cam and shaft shall be such that the table does not  

 rotate more than one revolution in 25 drops.
The surface of the frame and off  

 the table which come into contact at the end of the drop shall be maintained  

 smooth, plane, and horizontal and parallel with the upper surface of the  

 table and shall make continuous contact over a full 360 degrees.
D.3.1.1.3 The supporting frame of the flow table shall be integrally cast  

 of fine-grained, high-grade cast iron.
The frame casting shall have three  

 integral stiffening ribs extending the full height of the frame and located  

 120 degrees apart.
The top of the frame shall be chilled to a depth of  

 approximately 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) and the face shall be ground and lapped  

 square with the bore to give 360 degrees contact with the shaft shoulder.
The  

 underside of the base of the frame shall be ground to secure a complete  

 contact with the steel plate beneath.
D.3.1.1.4 The flow may be driven by a motor(* 9), connected to the cam  

 shaft through an enclosed worm gear speed reducer and flexible coupling.
The  

 speed of the cam shaft shall be approximately 100 rpm.
The motor drive  

 mechanism shall not be fastened or mounted on the table based plate or frame.
The performance of a flow table shall be considered satisfactory if, in  

 calibration tests, the table gives a flow value that does not differ by more  

 than 5 percentage points from flow values obtained with a suitable  

 calibration material.(* 10) D.3.1.2 Flow table mounting D.3.1.2.1 The flow table frame shall be tightly bolted to a cast iron or  

 steel plate at least 1 inch (25 (25 mm) thick and 10 inches (250 mm) square.  

 The top surface of this plate shall be machined to a smooth plane surface.  

 The plate shall be anchored to the top of a concrete pedestal by four 1/2  

 inch (13-mm) bolts that pass through the plate and are embedded at least 6  

 inches (150 mm) in the pedestal.
The pedestal shall be cast inverted on the  

 base plate.
A positive contact between the base plate and the pedestal shall  

 be obtained at all points.
No nuts or other such levelling devices shall be  

 used between the plate and the pedestal.
Levelling shall be effected by  

 suitable means under the base of the pedestal.
D.3.1.2.2 The pedestal shall be 10 to 11 inches (250 to 275 mm) square at  

 the top, and 15 to 16 inches (375 to 400 mm) square at the bottom, 25 to 30  

 inches (625 to 750 mm) in height, and shall be of monolithic construction,  

 cast from concrete weighing at least 140 lb/ft3 (2240 kg/cubic metre). A  

 stable gasket cork pad, 1/2 inch (13 mm) thick and approximately 4 inches  

 (102 mm) square, shall be inserted under each corner of the pedestal.
The  

 flow table shall be checked frequently for levelness of the table top,  

 stability of the pedestal, and thightness of the bolts and nuts in the table  

 base and the pedestal plate. (A torque of 20 lb ft (27 N m) is recommended  

 when tightening those fastenings.) D.3.1.2.3 The table top, after the frame has been mounted on the pedestal,  

 shall be level along two diameters at right angles to each other, in both the  

 raised and lowered positions.
D.3.1.3 Flow table lubrication D.3.1.3.1 The vertical shaft of the table shall be kept clean and shall be  

 lightly lubricated with a light oil (SAE-10). Oil shall not be present  

 between the contact faces of the table top and the supporting frame.
Oil on  

 the cam face will lessen wear and promote smoothness of operation.
The table  

 should be raised and permitted to drop a dozen or more times just prior to  

 use if it has not been operated for some time.
D.3.1.4 Mould D.3.1.4.1 The mould for casting the flow specimen shall be of cast bronze  

 or brass, constructed as shown in fig.
D.3. The Rockwell hardness number of  

 the metal shall be not less than HRB 25. The diameter of the top opening  

 shall be 2.75 +/- 0.02 inches (69.8 +/- 0.5 mm) for new moulds and 2.75+0.05  

 inches (+ 1.3 mm) and -0.02 inches for moulds in use.
The surfaces of the  

 base and top shall be paralled and at right angles to the vertical axis of  

 the cone.
The mould shall have a minimum wall thickness of 0.2 inches (5 mm).  

 The outside of the top edge of the mould shall be shaped so as to provide an  

 integral collar for convenient lifting of the mould.
All surfaces shall be  

 machined to a smooth finish.
A circular shield approximately 10 inches (254  

 mm) in diameter, with a centre opening approximately 4 inches (102 mm) in  

 diameter, made of non-absorbing material not attacked by the cement, shall be  

 used with the flow mould to prevent mortar from spilling on the table top.
D.3.2 Scales and weights(* 11) D.3.2.1 Scales D.3.2.1.1 The scales used shall conform to the following requirements.
On  

 scales in use the permissible variation at a load of 2000 g shall be +/- 2.0  

 g.
The permissible variation on new scales shall be one half of this value.  

 The sensibility reciprocal(* 12) shall be not greater than twice the  

 permissible variation.
D.3.2.2 Weights D.3.2.2.1 The permissible variations on weights shall be as prescribed in  

 the table below.
The permissible variations on new weights shall be one half  

 of the values in the table below.
PERMISSIBLE VARIATIONS ON WEIGHTS D.4 Trough test for determination of the self-sustaining exothermic  

 decomposition of fertilizers containing nitrates(* 13) D.4.1 Definition A fertilizer capable of self-sustaining decomposition is definied as one  

 in which decomposition initiated in a localized area will spread throughout  

 the mass.
The tendency of a fertilizer to undergo this type of decomposition  

 can be determined by means of the through test.
In this test localized  

 decomposition is initiated in a bed of the fertilizer to be offered for  

 shipment contained in a horizontally mounted trough, and the rate at which  

 the decomposition propagates through it is measured after removal of the  

 initiating heat source.
D.4.2 Apparatus The apparatus (fig.
D.4-1) consists of a trough of internal dimensions 150  

 x 150 x 500 mm, open at the top.
The trough is constructed of square meshed  

 gauze (preferably stainless steel) with a mesh width of about 2.5 mm and a  

 wire thickness of 1.5 mm.
The bars have a diameter of 10 mm.
Fertilizers with  

 a particle size distribution such that a significant amount falls through the  

 mesh of the trough should be tested in a trough of smaller mesh gauze, or  

 alternatively in a trough lined with gauze of a smaller mesh.
During  

 initiation sufficient heat should be provided and maintained to established a  

 uniform decomposition front.
Two alternative methods are recommended, viz:
D.4.2.1 Electrical heating An electrical heating element (capacity 250 watts) enclosed in a stainless  

 steel box is placed inside and at one end of the trough (fig.
D.4.2). The  

 dimensions of the stainless steel box are 150 x 150 x 10 mm, and the wall  

 thickness 3 mm.
The side of the box which is not in contact with the  

 fertilizer should be insulated with an asbestos plate (5 mm thick). The  

 heating side of the box may be protected with aluminium foil or a stainless  

 steel plate.
D.4.2.2 Gas burners A steel plate (thickness 1-3 mm) is placed inside one end of the trough  

 and in contact with the wire mesh (fig.
D.4-1). The plate is heated by means  

 of two Teclu burners which are fixed to the trough support and are capable of  

 maintaining the plate at temperatures between 400-800 degrees C, i.e. dull  

 red heat.
For example, this may be achieved by a burner capacity of about 200  

 cubic decimetre/h of town gas at a pressure of 6 cm water assuming a  

 specification of town gas as follows:
higher calorific value 4200 kcal/cubic metre, lower calorific value 3750 kcal/cubic metre, s = 0 degrees C, 760 mm Hg.
 D.4.2.3 To prevent heat transport along the outside of the trough a heat  

 shield consisting of a steel plate (2 mm thick) should be installed at about  

 5 cm from the end of the trough where the heating takes place.
D.4.2.4 The life of the apparatus may be prolonged if it is constructed of  

 stainless steel throughout.
This is particularly important in the case of the  

 gauze trough.
D.4.3 Procedure D.4.3.1 The apparatus should be set up under a fume hood to remove toxic  

 decomposition gases.
Although there is no explosion risk, when performing the  

 test it is advisable to have a protective shield, e.g. of suitable  

 transparent plastics, between the observer and the apparatus.
D.4.3.2 The trough is filled with a fertilizer in the form to be offered  

 for shipment and decomposition is initiated at one end, either electrically  

 or by means of gas burners as described above.
Heating should be continued  

 until decomposition of the fertilizer is well established and propagation of  

 the front (over approximately 3-5 cm) has been observed.
In the case of  

 products with high thermal stability it may be necessary to continue heating  

 for one hour.
In the case of fertilizers which show a tendency to melt, the  

 heating should be done carefully, i.e. with a small flame.
D.4.3.3 About 20 minutes after the heating has been discontinued, the  

 position of the decomposition front is noted.
The front can be observed by  

 difference in colour, e.g. brown (undecomposed fertilizer) to white  

 (decomposed fertilizer). A graph of the progression of the decomposition  

 front along the trough against time is then prepared, and the propagation  

 rate (cm/h) is obtained from the graph, using the portion where the rate is  

 constant.
D.4.4 Results D.4.4.1 If propagation of the decomposition continues throughout the  

 entire trough, the fertilizer is capable of showing self-sustaining  

 decomposition.
The propagation rate (cm/h) is noted.
 D.4.4.2 If propagation does not continue throughout the entire trough, the  

 fertilizer is regarded as free from the hazard of self-sustaining  

 decomposition.
(* 1) »Flammable« has the same meaning as  

 »inflammable«.
In common with the usage in other IMCO codes and in  

 recent conventions adopted under the auspices of IMCO, the term  

 »flammable« has been used in preference to »inflammable«  

 throughout the present Code as being more widely accepted internationally and  

 less liable to misinterpretation.
 (* 2) Procedures given in the Code apply only to the usual cases wherein  

 the moisture consists almost entirely of water or ice.
 (* 3) For recommended methods of determining the angle of repose refer to  

 Section 5.
 (* 4) For recommended methods of determining the angle of repose refer to  

 Section 5.
 (* 5) NOTE: Generally a lower angle of repose will result in a greater  

 shifting potential in cargoes other than those which may liquefy.
(* 6) The 1974 SOLAS Convention consistently uses the term  

 »inflammable« rather than »flammable«, which has the same  

 meaning.
For the reasons given in the footnote (* 1), the term  

 »flammable« is used thoughout the present Code.
(* 7) Note: In certain conditions, the diameter of the cone may increase  

 before the flow moisture point is reached, due to low friction between the  

 grains, rather than to plastic flow.
This must not be mistaken for a flow  

 state.
 (* 8) Source: »Standard Specification for Flow table for Use in Test  

 of Hydraulic Cement«, Designation C230-68. Reprinted by permission of  

 American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), 1916 Race Street,  

 Philadelphia, Penna., USA, copyright 1977.
(* 9) A 1/20 hp (0.3 W) motor has been found adequate.
The flow table may  

 be driven by a hand-operated cam shaft as shown in the illustration.
 (* 10) Such a material may be obtained from the Cement and Concrete  

 Reference Laboratory at the National Bureau of Standards, Washington, D.C.  

 20234, USA.
 (* 11) Source: »Standard Method of Test for Compressive Strength of  

 Hydraulic Cement Motors«, Designation C109-58. Reprinted by permission  

 of American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), 1916 Race Street,  

 Philadelphia, Penna., USA, copyright 1977.
(* 12) Generally defined, the sensibility reciprocal is the charge in load  

 required to change the position of rest of the indicating element or elements  

 of a non-automatic-indicating scale a definite amount at any load.
For more  

 complete definition, see »Specifications, Tolerances, and Regulations  

 for Commercial Weighing and Measuring Devices« Handbook H44, National  

 Bureau of Standards, Washington, DC., USA.
September, 1949, pp. 92 and 93.
 (* 13) Source: IMDG CODE, pages 9005-9008.
 (* 14) Entry to be developed later.
