 Skrivelse om bestemmelse om NATO-procedurer for behandling af  

 maritime skadesager og uheld mv.
 Bilag: STANAG 1179 (2.  

 udgave, rettelse 6 af 11 AUG 1993).
 Erstatter: CHSBST 046-1 af  

 NOV 1975.
Formål 1.  

  

 Denne  

 bestemmelse fastlægger de procedurer, der er gældende, når enheder eller  

 personel fra to eller flere NATO-lande bliver impliceret i maritime  

 skadesager  

 og uheld mv.
Gyldighedsområde og beføjelser 2.  

  

 STANAG  

 1179 er ratificeret og implementeret af NATO-landene i den udstrækning og med  

 de reservationer, der er anført sidst i bilaget.
 De i STANAG 1179 angivne  

 retningslinier skal følges, idet Forsvarskommandoen i hvert enkelt tilfælde  

 vil  

 træffe afgørelse om, hvilken af følgende procedurer der skal træde i kraft:
 Procedure A: En af en NATO  

 kommandochef etableret kombineret undersøgelseskommission behandler sagen.
 Procedure B: En national  

 undersøgelseskommission med vidner eller observatører fra andre nationer  

 behandler sagen.
 Procedure C: Fase 1: Berørte  

 nationale undersøgelseskornmissioner behandler sagen.
 Fase 2: En kombineret  

 kommission udarbejder en fælles rapport.
Øvrige forhold 3.  

  

 Opmærksomheden  

 henledes på, at bestemmelserne i FKOBST 153-3 under alle omstændigheder skal  

 følges.
4.  

  

 Kontrolstabens  

 Inspektionsafdeling er sagsbehandlende afdeling.
Telefonisk henvendelse kan  

 ske til Havari- og Undersøgelsessektionen (KTI2).
Forsvarskommandoen, den 31. januar  

 1997 E.B.GeneralmajorJens Johansen Bilag NATO Standardization Agreement (STANAG) Combined  

 Investigation of Maritime Incidents Annex A: Conduct of a Combined Board of  

 Inquiry.
 Related Documents: STANAG 3531 FS Investigation  

 of Aircraft/Missile Accidents/Incidents.
Aim 1.  

  

 The aim of this agreement is to lay  

 down procedures which may be followed in the event of maritime incidents  

 involving  

 units or personnel of two or more NATO nations.
Agreement 2.  

  

 Participating nations agree to three  

 alternative procedures which should be used for the conduct of inquiries into  

 such man-time incidents.
The purpose of these inquiries would be to ascertain  

 the facts, to reach conclusions as to the direct and indirect causes of the  

 event and, if needed, to make recommendations to prevent a recurrence.
 3.  

  

 The alternatives are:
a.  

  

 Procedure A.
Combined Board of  

 Inquiry.
b.  

  

 Procedure B.
A National Inquiry  

 Attended by Witnesses and/or Observers from Other Nations.
c.  

  

 Procedure C.
Independent National  

 Inquiries Coordinated by the Presidents of those Inquiries.
The Major NATO Commander or Major Subordinate  

 Commander under whose command the units or personnel concerned were operating  

 should recommend the procedure he deems most appropriate for each specific  

 incident.
Nations are free to accept the NATO Commander’s recommendation  

 or to  

 choose an alternative procedure in consultation with each other.
Where there  

 is no common NATO Commander, the procedures to be used should be determined  

 and  

 initiated as agreed between the nations concerned.
 4.  

  

 Nations retain all their existing  

 rights to conduct their own investigations in accordance with their own laws  

 or  

 regulations.
Procedure  

 A - Combined Board of Inquiry 5.  

  

 A Combined Board of Inquiry will be  

 convened by the appropriate Major NATO or Major NATO Subordinate Commander or  

 as agreed by the nations concerned.
The convening authority will appoint  

 officers  

 to form the Combined Board, which shall be composed of a minimum of 3  

 officers,  

 with each nation involved in the incident represented.
The President of the  

 Board is to be superior in rank, and if practicable, the other members are to  

 be equal or superior in rank to any person who may be affected by the  

 findings  

 of the Board.
6.  

  

 Combined Boards are to be held in  

 private and the record of the proceedings as well as the subsequent reports  

 shall be treated as privileged documents and shall only be used for official  

 purposes.
Information concerning the proceedings, testimony, findings,  

 conclusions and recommendations shall not be released publicity without the  

 agreement of all nations involved.
 7.  

  

 The conduct of the inquiry is to be  

 in accordance with Annex A to this STANAG.
8.  

  

 The report of the Board of Inquiry  

 is to be forwarded by the President to the convening authority, copies being  

 sent direct to the Ministries of Defence of the nations involved.
A verbatim  

 transcript of all oral evidence given before the Board, together with all  

 relevant data and documents presented to or prepared by the Board, should be  

 included.
 9.  

  

 The costs will be met in accordance  

 with established NATO procedures, i.e. administrative and transportation  

 costs  

 are the responsibility of the convening authority and per diem expenses are a  

 national responsibility.
Procedure  

 B - A National Inquiry Attended by Witnesses and/or Observers From Other  

 Nations 10.  

  

 Boards of Inquiry will be convened  

 by the appropriate national authorities, who will request the attendance of  

 witnesses  

 from other nations.
Such witnesses may give evidence under the laws and  

 procedures of the convening nation or if this is not acceptable to the  

 nations  

 involved, may give evidence under the rules for witnesses at a Combined Board  

 (Annex A). Observers from the nations concerned may be present during the  

 relevant  

 part of the discussions.
11.  

  

 Unless otherwise agreed, the  

 evidence of each foreign witness, and any findings which affect him, are to  

 be  

 forwarded to the nation concerned.
Evidence and findings of concern to NATO  

 shall be forwarded to the relevant NATO Commander by the national  

 authorities.
 12.  

  

 The nation convening the inquiry  

 shall be responsible for the cost of attendance of foreign witnesses.
Procedure  

 C - Independent National Inquiries Coordinated by the Presidents of the  

 Inquiries 13.  

  

 Inquiries under this procedure  

 consist of two phases.
In the first phase, each National authority concerned  

 appoints its own Board of Inquiry acting in accordance with national rules  

 and  

 regulations and hearing evidence only from its own nationals.
During this  

 phase  

 the Presidents of the Boards of Inquiry shall exchange initial national  

 reports of the incident.
If they consider it necessary, the Presidents may  

 meet  

 in order to obtain or exchange any further information they deem appropriate  

 to the establishment of the facts.
14.  

  

 In the second phase, the reports  

 drawn up by the national Boards of Inquiry are compared by a Combined  

 Commission composed of the Presidents of the National Boards with any other  

 members agreed by the nations concerned.
The Combined Commission then  

 prepares  

 a summary showing where the reports agree and where they differ.
The summary  

 is  

 sent to the Ministries of Defence of the nations involved, and if applicable,  

 to the NATO authorities concerned.
 15.  

  

 The combined summary and any  

 information exchanged between the Presidents of the National Boards of  

 Inquiry  

 shall only be used for official purposes and are not to be released without  

 the  

 con-sent of all the nations concerned.
Implementation  

 of the Agreement 16.  

  

 This STANAG is considered to be implemented  

 when Nations and Major NATO Commanders have issued the necessary  

 orders/instructions  

 to the forces concerned putting the procedures detailed in this agreement  

 into  

 effect.
Annex A Conduct  

 of a Combined Board of Inquiry Terms  

 of Reference 1.  

  

 The convening authority shall provide a Board  

 of Inquiry with a convening order which shall contain full and specific  

 instructions to:
 a.  

  

 The composition of the Board.
 b.  

  

 The place and time at which the Board shall  

 assemble, unless the President is directed to issue his own orders in this  

 respect.
 c.  

  

 The investigation required.
 d.  

  

 The matters on which findings or  

 recommendations are required.
 e.  

  

 The security classification of the matter to be  

 investigated.
 f.  

  

 Responsibility for providing the necessary  

 administrative and clerical support for the Board.
 A draft Convening Signal is at Appendix 1.
Responsibilities  

 of the Board 2.  

  

 The Board shall ascertain the facts, reach  

 conclusions as to the direct and indirect causes of the event and make  

 recommendations  

 to prevent a recurrence.
 3.  

  

 The Board may invite a person to:
a.  

  

 attend as a witness, or b.  

  

 make a statement in writing.
 Persons will be advised of their rights as  

 witnesses as set out in para. 10 below.
 4.  

  

 A Board of Inquiry is to maintain a verbatim  

 record of all the proceedings.
 5.  

  

 The Board may receive any evidence which it  

 considers relevant whether or not it would be admissible in a civil or  

 criminal  

 court.
Procedures 6.  

  

 Evidence will normally be received in French or  

 English; however, interpreters will be made available when required.
 7.  

  

 Evidence before a Board of Inquiry shall not be  

 taken on oath, unless the national procedures of a particular witness so  

 require.
 A witness testifying on oath before a Board  

 shall take the oath recognized by his belief or national practice.
 8.  

  

 Witnesses shall be cautioned that they are not  

 to disclose, outside the confines of the Board, any evidence which they have  

 given or any other knowledge concerning the matter under enquiry which they  

 may  

 have become aware of as a result of the investigation procedures.
 9.  

  

 The obligation of witnesses as stated in  

 paragraph 8 above, does not affect their duty to give evidence in accordance  

 with national rules of procedure.
Rights  

 of Persons Who May Be Affected 10.  

  

 A witness or other person designated by the  

 convening authority or the President as someone who may be affected by the  

 findings of the Board shall be advised of and accorded the following rights:
 a.  

  

 To be given notice of the proceedings.
 b.  

  

 To be present during the proceedings, but not  

 when the investigation is closed for deliberation.
 c.  

  

 To be represented by counsel or adviser.
 d.  

  

 To testify as a witness.
 e.  

  

 To introduce evidence.
 f.  

  

 To cross-examine witnesses.
 g.  

  

 To refuse to answer any question the answer to  

 which would incriminate himself.
 h.  

  

 To make a written statement to be included in  

 the records of proceedings.
 i.  

  

 To address the Board at the conclusion of  

 presentation of evidence.
Custody  

 of Evidence 11.  

  

 The authority convening the Board is  

 to issue orders for the preservation and custody of evidence, such as charts,  

 logs, signal messages, etc. until they can be delivered to the Board.
Appendix 1 to Annex A Draft  

 Convening Signal From: (To be inserted) To: (Ships and authorities concerned) Info: (MODs of Countries concerned) (Major NATO Commanders concerned) (NATO Subordinate Commander concerned) Classification: (To be inserted) DIG: (To be allocated when appropriate) Subject: Combined Board of Inquiry Reference: A.
STANAG 1179 (NOTAL).
 1.  

  

 A Combined Board of Inquiry  

 comprising the following officers is to assemble on board (ship/place) at  

 (date/time/zone) or as directed by the President:
a.  

  

 (President) b.
 c.
et seq 2.  

  

 The Board is to inquire into the  

 circumstances attending the (scope of inquiry). The classification is 3.  

  

 The Board is to be conducted in  

 accordance with STANAG 1179 Procedure ALPHA (and is to make recommendations  

 to  

 prevent a recurrence).
4.  

  

 The following documents/exhibits are  

 to be impounded and for-warded to the President.
Supplementary instructions  

 are  

 to be issued by the President as necessary.
 a.
 b.
 c.
et seq 5.  

  

 Stenographer will be provided by 6.  

  

 copies of the Board’s report are to  

 be submitted.
Ratifying  

 Nations Belgium Canada Denmark France Germany Greece Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Turkey United Kingdom United States Reservations DA Danish agreement to the rules in this STANAG  

 contains no obligations to Danish non-military units or non-military  

 individuals.
 GE Ratification of this STANAG by the Federal  

 Republic of Germany does not involve a commitment to handle the reports  

 mentioned in the first sentence of paragraph 6 as privileged documents in the  

 national area.
 GR Greece agreement to the rules in this STANAG  

 contains no obligation to non-military vessels and non-military personnel.
 NL Netherlands agreement to the rules in this  

 STANAG contains no obligation to Netherlands non-military units and  

 non-military personnel.
 As procedures A and B contravene existing  

 Netherlands  

 statute-law, these procedures can  

 only be used for the conduct of inquiries into maritime incidents involving  

 Netherlands  

 military units or  

 Netherlands  

 military personnel if the following  

 conditions are being met:
1.  

  

 Procedure A should be limited to a  

 provisional inquiry on the spot by a combined board of inquiry to ascertain  

 the  

 facts, reporting these facts to ADMNLHOME; 2.  

  

 Procedure B will be followed only  

 when the facts of the incident are submitted to the “Netherlandse  

 Marineraad”  

 according the  

 Netherlands  

 laws and procedures.
 SP It is accepted exclusively the use of C  

 procedure and only for military people and military units.
