 Vedr. inddrivelse af underholdsbidrag i udlandet i henhold til  

 FN-konventionen af 20. juni 1956.
 Til orientering fremsendes herved en fra Haagerkonferencen om  

 international privatret modtaget liste med oplysning om de udpegede  

 centralmyndigheder i henhold til ovennævnte konvention.
Med venlig hilsen Civilretsdirektoratet Lars Thøgersen HAGUE CONFERENCE ON PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL LAW The Permanent Bureau of the Hague Conference on private international law  

 presents its compliments to the National Organs and, in accordance with the  

 Decision of the Eighteenth Session (Final Act, Part B):
"The Eighteenth Session, (...) 7 Requests the Secretary General - (...) b to keep an up-to-date list of the authorities provided for under the  

 New York Convention of 1956 and to communicate this list, once or twice a  

 year, to all those authorities in the Menber States of the Hague  

 Conference;", ./. has the honour to provide them with two copies of the list of the  

 authorities provided for under the New York Convention of 20 June 1956 on  

 the Recovery Abroad of Maintenance.
This list has been compiled from  

 information provided by either the Member States of the Conference which are  

 Parties to the Convention, or by the Depositary of the Convention, the United  

 Nations Treaties Section.
 The Permanent Bureau would be grateful if the National Organs would  

 communicate to it any changes that should be made to this list and forward it  

 to the competent authorities concerned.
 The Permanent Bureau avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the  

 National Organs assurances of its highest consideration and esteem.
THE HAGUE, 17 December 1997 ./. Enclosure mentioned.
To the National Organs Copy for information to the Depositary of the Convention CONFERENCE DE LA HAYE DE DROIT INTERNATIONAL PRIVE Le Bureau Permanent de la Conference de La Haye de droit international  

 prive presente ses compliments aux Organes nationaux et, conformement a la  

 Decision de la Dix-huitieme session:
"La Dix-huitieme session, (...) 7 Charge le Secretaire general:
(...) b de tenir a jour la liste des autorites prevues par la Convention de  

 New York de 1956 et de communiquer, au rythme d'une ou deux fois par annee  

 cette liste a toutes ces autorites dans les Etats membres de la Conference de  

 La Haye;", ./. a l'honneur de leur faire parvenir ci-joint deux exemplaires de la  

 liste des autorites prevues par la Convention de New York du 20 juin 1956  

 sur le recouvrement des aliments a l'etranger.
Cette liste a ete etablie  

 sur la base de renseignements qui ont ete donnes, soit par les Etats membres  

 de la Conference Parties a la Convention, soit par le depositaire de la  

 Convention, la Section des Traites des Nations Unies.
 Le Bureau Permanent serait reconnaissant aux Organes nationaux de lui  

 faire part des modifications eventuelles a apporter a cette liste et de la  

 communiquer aux autorites competentes concernees.
 Le Bureau Permanent saisit cette occasion pour renouveler aux Organes  

 nationaux les assurances de sa tres haute consideration.
 LA HAYE, le 17 decembre 1997.
 ./. Annexe mentionnee.
