Bilag 1 Bilag 2 Cirkulære om udveksling af statsansatte mellem Storbritannien og Danmark (Indkaldelse af ansøgninger om udveksling til Storbritannien i 2009) Storbritannien ved Cabinet Office og Danmark ved Personalestyrelsen har indgået aftale om udveksling af statsansatte i perioder af normalt 6 måneders varighed.
Aftalen ligger som bilag 2 til denne vejledning.
Personalestyrelsen, den 27. august 2008 Henrik Bo Nielsen Bilag 1 Bilateral Exchange Scheme Application for Exchange with the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Please complete in type or black ink.
Applications must be submitted via personnel divisions Bilag 2 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND THE DANISH MINISTRY OF FINANCE, STATE EMPLOYER'S AUTHORITY TO PROMOTE AND PROVIDE GUIDELINES FOR THE EXCHANGE OF CIVIL SERVANTS BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES IN THE INTERESTS OF IMPROVING MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING 1) The purpose of this Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Danish Ministry of Finance, State Employer's Authority is to establish a general framework between the Cabinet Office in London and the Danish Ministry of Finance, State Employer's Authority (hereinafter referred to as "the Services") to promote _ and provide guidelines for exchanges of civil servants between the two countries in the interests of improving mutual understanding.
2) Those taking part in the exchange programme will have the opportunity of doing responsible work in the field of public administration, either in a specific post or on specific projects of value to the receiving department.
They will be integrated to the fullest extent possible in the work of the receiving department.
Danish visitors to the UK will operate in English.
British visitors to Denmark may operate in English.
3) As far as possible, a numerical balance will be maintained between the participants involved from each of the two countries.
About three exchanges (each way) are envisaged on an annual basis.
The exchanges will not generally be head-to-head but may be so if it is possible to arrange this.
4) The programme will be open to British and Danish administrative or specialist civil servants of high potential.
As a general rule, they should have suitable experience involving opportunities for taking responsible decisions.
The duration of an exchange will be subject to agreement between the participant and the home and host department but will normally be at least six months 5) Officials will continue to be paid by their own department and will receive allowances and travelling expenses between the two countries from that department.
The cost of working trips undertaken by officials on behalf of the departments of the host country will be paid by the host country.
6) The Services will arrange for the relevant documentation, including full background details on the participants and on their field of interest, to be made available at the beginning of each year.
Every effort will be made to secure a placement within two months of the receipt of applications.
 7) The Services will collaborate closely in preparing and putting into operation the individual exchange projects.. They will make their good offices available for the settlement and clarification of specific personal and technical questions arising from the exchange programme.
8) The administration and co-ordination of the arrangements contained in this Memorandum of Understanding will be the responsibility of the Fast Stream, European and Recruitment Division on behalf of the Cabinet Office in London and of the Danish State Employer's Authority 9) This Memorandum of Understanding has been signed by the respective representative of the Cabinet Office and the Danish State Employer's Authority.
 10) The foregoing record represents the understanding reached between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of Denmark upon the matters referred to therein.
